# Biological viability assessment update for Pacific salmon and steelhead listed under the Endangered Species Act:  Pacific Northwest

*DRAFT 5.24.2021*

[Northwest Fisheries Science Center]{.smallcaps}

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year geometric mean of raw natural spawner counts. This is
  the raw total spawner count times the fraction natural estimate, if
  available.  In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total spawner
  counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that a total
  spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of natural
  spawners available. The geometric mean was computed as the product of
  counts raised to the power of reciprocal the number of counts
  available (2 to 5). A minimum of 2 values was used to compute the
  geometric mean. Percent change between the most recent two 5-year
  periods is shown on the far right.

Acknowledgements:  This review benefited from contributions by numerous
people, particularly by providing data and reviewing earlier drafts of
the report.  We would like to particularly thank the following, but also
note that any errors are entirely our own.  

Aaron Bosworth, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Aaron Brooks, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Andrew Fowler, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Anne Mullan, National Marine Fisheries Service

Casey Ruff, Skagit System Cooperative

Chris James, Northwest Indian Fish Commission

Christina Iverson, National Marine Fisheries Service

Craig Smith, Nisqually Tribe

Devin Flawd, Lummi Tribe

Diego Holmgren, Tulalip Tribes

Elise X. Kelley, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Erik Lesko, PacifiCorp

Jamie Anthony, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Jason Schaffler, Muckleshoot Tribe

John Serl, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Julie Klacan, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Kate Konoski, Stillaguamish Tribe

Kelly Reis, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Larry Lestelle, NWBiostream

Mark Downen, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Mark Lewis, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Mike Crewson, Tulalip Tribes

Mike Haggerty, MIKE HAGGERTY CONSULTING

Mike McHenry, Elwha Tribe

Neala Kendall, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Ned Currence, Nooksack Tribes

Pete Kairis, Skagit System Cooperative

Pete Verhey, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Rob Jones, Northwest Indian Fish Commission

Russel Ladley, Puyallup Tribe

Scott Bass, Point No Point Treaty Council

Steve Manlow, Lower Columbia Fish Recovery Board

Tara Livingood, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Thomas Buehrens, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Tom Wainwright, NWFSC (retired)

Tim Copeland - Idaho Department of Fish and Game

Jay Hesse - Nez Perce Tribe

Andrew Murdoch - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

John Arterburn - Confederated Tribes of the Coleville Reservation

Joe Zendt - Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation

Chris Frederiksen - Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation

Jim Ruzycki - Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Lytle Denny - Shoshone-Bannock Tribe

Russ Perry - USGS

Ken Tiffan - USGS

Ryan Kinzer - Nez Perce Tribe

Rick Orme - Nez Perce Tribe

Craig Rabe - Nez Perce Tribe

Bill Young - Nez Perce Tribe

Evan Brown - Idaho Department of Fish and Game

Rebecca Scully - Idaho Department of Fish and Game

Lance Hebdon - Idaho Department of Fish and Game

John Powell - Idaho Department of Fish and Game

Eli Felts - Idaho Department of Fish and Game

Katie Lawry - Idaho Department of Fish and Game

Greg Lippert - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Michael Gallinat - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Mclain Johnson - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Charles Frady - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Todd Miller - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Ethan Crawford - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Dan Rawding - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Jeremy Cram - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Thomas Buehrens - Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Kasey Bliesner - Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Jake Chambers - Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Ian Tattam - Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Joseph Feldhaus - Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife

Ted Sedell - Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife Bill Bosch -
Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation

Elaine Harvey - Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation Brain
Miller - Confederated Tribes of the Coleville Reservation

Donna Trott - Confederated Tribes of the Coleville Reservation

George Batton - Sitka Tech for Confederated Tribes of the Coleville
Reservation

This report can be cited as:

Northwest Fisheries Science Center.  2021.  Biological viability
assessment update for Pacific salmon and steelhead listed under the
Endangered Species Act:  Pacific Northwest.

Author contributions:

Christopher Jordan: Interior Columbia

Damon Holzer: maps

Elizabeth Holmes: status and trends analyses and graphs

James Myers: Lower Columbia, Willamette, Puget Sound

Katie Barnas: data management, habitat

Laurie Weitkamp: Oregon coast

Lisa Crozier: climate, environment

Mari Williams[^1]: Interior Columbia

Martin Liermann: Lake Ozette

Michael Ford: editor, project management

Mindy Rowse: Puget Sound

Monica Diaz^1^: data management

##### Table of Contents

[Biological viability assessment update for Pacific salmon and steelhead
listed under the Endangered Species Act:  Pacific Northwest
[1](#biological-viability-assessment-update-for-pacific-salmon-and-steelhead-listed-under-the-endangered-species-act-pacific-northwest)](#biological-viability-assessment-update-for-pacific-salmon-and-steelhead-listed-under-the-endangered-species-act-pacific-northwest)

[Introduction and summary of conclusions
[7](#introduction-and-summary-of-conclusions)](#introduction-and-summary-of-conclusions)

[Methods [10](#methods)](#methods)

[ESU boundaries [16](#esu-boundaries)](#esu-boundaries)

[Interior Columbia River domain viability summaries
[17](#interior-columbia-river-domain-viability-summaries)](#interior-columbia-river-domain-viability-summaries)

[Upper Columbia River spring Chinook salmon ESU
[17](#upper-columbia-river-spring-chinook-salmon-esu)](#upper-columbia-river-spring-chinook-salmon-esu)

[Upper Columbia River steelhead DPS
[29](#upper-columbia-river-steelhead-dps)](#upper-columbia-river-steelhead-dps)

[Snake River Spring/summer-Run Chinook salmon ESU
[42](#snake-river-springsummer-run-chinook-salmon-esu)](#snake-river-springsummer-run-chinook-salmon-esu)

[Snake River Fall-Run Chinook salmon ESU
[60](#snake-river-fall-run-chinook-salmon-esu)](#snake-river-fall-run-chinook-salmon-esu)

[Snake River Sockeye Salmon ESU
[70](#snake-river-sockeye-salmon-esu)](#snake-river-sockeye-salmon-esu)

[Snake River Basin Steelhead DPS
[80](#snake-river-basin-steelhead-dps)](#snake-river-basin-steelhead-dps)

[Middle Columbia River steelhead DPS
[102](#middle-columbia-river-steelhead-dps)](#middle-columbia-river-steelhead-dps)

[Lower Columbia River domain viability summaries
[122](#lower-columbia-river-domain-viability-summaries)](#lower-columbia-river-domain-viability-summaries)

[Lower Columbia River Chinook salmon ESU
[122](#lower-columbia-river-chinook-salmon-esu)](#lower-columbia-river-chinook-salmon-esu)

[Lower Columbia River coho salmon ESU
[143](#lower-columbia-river-coho-salmon-esu)](#lower-columbia-river-coho-salmon-esu)

[Lower Columbia River steelhead DPS
[159](#lower-columbia-river-steelhead-dps)](#lower-columbia-river-steelhead-dps)

[Columbia River chum salmon ESU
[173](#columbia-river-chum-salmon-esu)](#columbia-river-chum-salmon-esu)

[Upper Willamette Chinook salmon ESU
[182](#upper-willamette-chinook-salmon-esu)](#upper-willamette-chinook-salmon-esu)

[Upper Willamette steelhead DPS
[197](#upper-willamette-steelhead-dps)](#upper-willamette-steelhead-dps)

[Oregon and Washington coast domain viability summaries
[206](#oregon-and-washington-coast-domain-viability-summaries)](#oregon-and-washington-coast-domain-viability-summaries)

[Puget Sound Chinook salmon ESU
[206](#puget-sound-chinook-salmon-esu)](#puget-sound-chinook-salmon-esu)

[Puget Sound steelhead DPS
[223](#puget-sound-steelhead-dps)](#puget-sound-steelhead-dps)

[Hood Canal summer-run chum salmon ESU
[243](#hood-canal-summer-run-chum-salmon-esu)](#hood-canal-summer-run-chum-salmon-esu)

[Lake Ozette sockeye salmon ESU
[254](#lake-ozette-sockeye-salmon-esu)](#lake-ozette-sockeye-salmon-esu)

[Oregon Coast coho salmon ESU
[267](#oregon-coast-coho-salmon-esu)](#oregon-coast-coho-salmon-esu)

[Recent trends in marine and terrestrial environments and their likely
influence on Pacific salmon in the Pacific Northwest
[293](#recent-trends-in-marine-and-terrestrial-environments-and-their-likely-influence-on-pacific-salmon-in-the-pacific-northwest)](#recent-trends-in-marine-and-terrestrial-environments-and-their-likely-influence-on-pacific-salmon-in-the-pacific-northwest)

[Literature Cited [319](#literature-cited)](#literature-cited)

[Supplement -- climate vulnerability analysis
[337](#supplement-climate-vulnerability-analysis)](#supplement-climate-vulnerability-analysis)





# Interior Columbia River domain viability summaries



## Snake River Fall-Run Chinook salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU

This ESU includes naturally spawned fall-run Chinook salmon originating
from the mainstem Snake River below Hells Canyon Dam and from the
Tucannon River, Grande Ronde River, Imnaha River, Salmon River, and
Clearwater River subbasins (). Also, fall-run Chinook salmon from the
following artificial propagation programs: The Lyons Ferry Hatchery
Program; Fall Chinook Acclimation Ponds Program; Nez Perce Tribal
Hatchery Program; and the Idaho Power Program (70 FR 37160, June 28,
2005). Fish passage is blocked at Hells Canyon Dam (RM 247), the lowest
of three impassable dams that form the Hells Canyon Complex.
Historically, natural production from this ESU was mainly from spawning
in the mainstem of the Snake River upstream of the Hells Canyon Dam
complex. The spawning and rearing habitat associated with the current
extant population represents approximately 20% of the total historical
habitat available to the ESU (Dauble *et al.* 2003). There was a single
historical population (the Middle Snake population) above the current
location of Hells Canyon Dam, consisting of two major spawning areas.
The primary (largest and most productive) Middle Snake River
subpopulation likely spawned within the area of direct aquifer influence
(Connor *et al.* 2019). Temperature conditions during spawning and
incubation were strongly influenced by water inputs from the aquifer,
allowing for earlier emergence timing and rapid growth, especially in
the reaches upstream of the current Swan Falls Dam site. The ICTRT
identified five major spawning areas (MaSAs) within the currently
available Lower Snake River population: Upper Hells Canyon MaSA (Hells
Canyon Dam on Snake River downstream to confluence with Salmon River);
Lower Hells Canyon MaSA (Snake River from Salmon River confluence
downstream to Lower Granite Dam pool); Clearwater River MaSA; Grande
Ronde River MaSA; and Tucannon River MaSA. A major spawning area is
defined as a system of one or more branches containing sufficient
habitat to support at least 500 spawners.

![](./media/media/image29.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Map of the Snake River fall-run Chinook salmon ESU's spawning
and rearing areas, illustrating populations and major population groups.

### Summary of previous viability conclusions

*2005*

The 2005 BRT review (Good *et al*. 2005) included an assessment of Snake
River fall Chinook salmon based on data for runs through the 2001 return
year. A majority of the rating points assigned by individual BRT members
fell into the "likely to become endangered" category (60%). The BRT
review noted that "...this outcome represented a somewhat more
optimistic assessment of the status of this ESU than was the case at the
time of the original status review\...". Reasons cited for a more
optimistic rating included: the number of natural origin spawners in
2001 was well over 1,000 for first time since 1975, management actions
had reduced the number of outside origin stray hatchery fish passing to
the spawning grounds, the increasing contribution of native Lyons Ferry
fish from supplementation programs and the fact that recent natural
origin returns had been fluctuating between 500 and 1,000 spawners --
somewhat higher than previous levels. The 2005 BRT status ratings for
the Snake River fall Chinook salmon ESU were also influenced by concerns
that the geometric mean abundance at the time was below 1,000 ("\...a
very low number for an entire ESU"), and because of the large fraction
of hatchery fish on the spawning grounds. Additional concerns cited by
the BRT included the fact that a large portion of historical mainstem
habitat was inaccessible. Some BRT members were concerned about the
possibility that a natural historical buffer between Snake River fall
Chinook and other Columbia River ESUs may have existed and that it had
been compromised by hatchery straying.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) concluded that abundance and productivity estimates
for the single remaining population of Snake River Fall Chinook salmon
had improved substantially relative to the time of listing. However the
current combined estimates of abundance and productivity population
still resulted in a moderate risk of extinction of between 5% and 25% in
100 years. The extant population of Snake River fall Chinook was the
only remaining from an historical ESU that also included large mainstem
populations upstream of the current location of the Hells Canyon Dam
complex. The increases in natural origin abundance were encouraging and
largely the result of the supplementation program initiated in 1998.
Overall, the new information considered in 2010 did not indicate a
change in the biological risk category since the time of the last BRT
status review in 2005.

*2015*

NWFSC (2015) concluded that the status of Snake River fall Chinook
salmon had clearly improved compared to the time of listing and compared
to prior status reviews. The single extant population in the ESU was
meeting the criteria for a rating of "viable" developed by the ICTRT,
but the ESU as a whole was not meeting the recovery goals described in
the recovery plan for the species, which requires either the single
population to be "highly viable with high certainty" and/or
establishment of a second viable population above the Hells Canyon Dam
complex (NMFS 2017b).

### Description of new data available for this review

Spawner abundance, productivity, and proportion natural-origin estimates
for the Lower Mainstem Snake River population are based on counts and
sampling of adult and jack (\<57 centimeters) fall Chinook salmon at
Lower Granite Dam (Young *et al.* 2020). A portion of the fish sampled
at the trap are retained and used as hatchery broodstock. Each year,
projected return levels of hatchery- and natural-origin Snake River fall
Chinook salmon are used to define a sampling strategy across the
duration of the run that will also achieve hatchery broodstock
objectives for the Snake River fall Chinook programs and be consistent
with impact limits on co-occurring listed steelhead returns. Fish
shunted into the trap are measured, sampled for scales to determine age,
and examined for marks and/or tags. Fish removed for broodstock are
transported to Lyons Ferry and Nez Perce Tribal hatcheries (on
alternative days) for holding and spawning.

Estimates of natural-origin returns are made by subtracting estimated
hatchery-origin returns from the total run estimates using hatchery
marks and tags and comparative Parental-Based Tagging (PBT) (Young *et
al.* 2020). Since 2015, all fall Chinook salmon in the Snake River Basin
that were spawned in a hatchery were genetically analyzed for subsequent
offspring origin analysis. The PBT program allows for a comprehensive
assessment of hatchery contributions and, therefore, a more direct
assessment of natural returns including spawner composition on spawning
grounds. Hatchery-origin returns were also monitored for juvenile
release site fidelity for spawning through radio tracking to evaluate
the impacts of supplementation on the natural population (Cleary *et
al.* 2018).

Redd surveys have been conducted annually since 1991. Shallow water
(\<3m) redds are surveyed by small unmanned aircraft systems now when
allowed based on statistical sampling developed by Groves, *et al.*
(2016) and Arnsberg, *et al.* (2020b). Deepwater redds are surveyed by
underwater camera (Tiffan & Perry 2020).

Sampling methods and statistical procedures used in generating the
estimated escapements have improved substantially over the past 15 to 20
years. Beginning with the 2005 return, estimates are available for the
total run apportioned into natural and hatchery returns by age (and
hatchery-origin) with standard errors and confidence limits (e.g., Young
*et al.* 2012). Estimates of escapement over Lower Granite Dam for
return years prior to 2005 were also based on adult dam counts and trap
sampling. Methods varied across years and are generally described in
annual reports compiled by the Washington Dept. of Fish and Wildlife
Snake River laboratory (Milks & Oakerman 2018).

The USGS Western Fisheries Research Center has developed a two-stage
state-space life-cycle model for naturally produced fall Chinook salmon
in the Snake River basin (Tiffan & Perry 2020). The model has been used
to assess proposed actions for the Columbia River Systems Biological
Opinion (NMFS 2020).

Some Upper Hells Canyon hatchery releases have been moved to the Salmon
River. Fish are beginning to return and any changes in natural
production or the pHOS in the Upper Hells Canyon MaSA will require at
least one full brood cycles.

The recovery plan was completed in 2017 and outlines the following three
potential recovery scenarios: (Scenario A) Achieve highly viable status
for the extant Lower Snake River population and viable status for the
currently extirpated Middle Snake River population; (Scenario B) Achieve
highly viable status for Lower Snake River population; and (Scenario C)
Achieve highly viable status for Lower Snake River population with the
creation of a Natural Production Emphasis Area (NPEA).

### Abundance and productivity

The updated data series described above of spawner abundance, age
structure, and hatchery/natural proportions were used to generate
current assessments of adult abundance and productivity at the
population level. Evaluations were done using both a set of metrics
corresponding to those used in prior Biological Review Team (BRT)
reviews as well as a set corresponding to the specific viability
criteria based on ICTRT recommendations for this ESU (ICTRT 2007). The
relatively simple BRT level metrics were done consistently across all
ESUs and DPSs to facilitate comparisons across domains. Assessments
using the ICTRT metrics are described in the TRT and Recovery Plan
Criteria section below. The ICTRT abundance and productivity metrics are
measured over longer time frames to dampen the effects of annual
variations and they use annual natural-origin age composition to
calculate brood year recruitment when sampling levels meet regional
fishery agency criteria. Population level estimates for this assessment
are available through the NWFSC Salmon Population Summary database
([[https://www.webapps.nwfsc.noaa.gov/apex/f?p=261:home:0]{.underline}](https://www.webapps.nwfsc.noaa.gov/apex/f?p=261:home:0)).

Prior to the early 1980s, returns of Snake River fall Chinook salmon
were likely predominately natural-origin (Bugert 1995). Natural-origin
return levels declined substantially following the completion of the
three-dam Hells Canyon Complex (1959-1967), which completely blocked
access to major production areas above Hells Canyon Dam, and the
construction of the lower Snake River dams (1962-1975). Based on
extrapolations from sampling at Ice Harbor Dam (1977-1990), the Lyons
Ferry Hatchery (1987-present) and at Lower Granite Dam (1990-present),
hatchery strays made up an increasing proportion of returns at Lower
Granite Dam (the uppermost Snake River mainstem dam) through the 1980s
(Bugert & Hopley 1989; Bugert *et al.* 1990). Strays from out-planting
Priest Rapids hatchery-origin fall Chinook salmon (an out-of-ESU stock
from the mid-Columbia) and Snake River fall Chinook salmon from the
Lyons Ferry Hatchery program (on-station releases initiated in the
mid-1980s) were the dominant contributors. Estimated natural-origin
returns reached a low of less than 100 fish in 1990. The initiation of
the supplementation program in 1998 increased returns allowed to
naturally spawn.

Since supplementation returns began, naturally spawning fall Chinook
salmon in the lower Snake River have included both returns originating
from naturally spawning parents and from returning hatchery releases.
Hatchery-origin fall Chinook salmon escaping upstream above Lower
Granite Dam to spawn naturally are now predominantly returns from Idaho
Power Company, Nez Perce Tribal Hatchery, and Fall Chinook Acclimation
Ponds supplementation program juvenile releases in reaches above Lower
Granite Dam and from releases at Lyons Ferry Hatchery that have
dispersed upstream. These fish are part of the listed ESU.

Supplementation and other measures since listing led to large increases
in natural origin returns, gradually at first and then in 2013 adult
spawner abundance reached over 20,000 fish (Figure 27, Table 15). From
2012-2015, natural origin returns were over 10,000 adults. Spawner
abundance has declined since 2016 to 5042 adult natural origin spawners
in 2019 (Figure 29). 2018 natural origin spawner abundance was 4,871, a
quarter of the return in 2013. This appears as a high negative percent
change in the 5 year geometric mean (Table 15), but when looking at the
trend in longer time frames, across more than one brood cycle, it shows
an increase in the ten year geometric mean relative to the last status
review, and a near zero population change for the 15 year trend in
abundance (Table 16). The geometric mean natural adult abundance for the
most recent 10 years (2010-2019) is 8,920 (0.15 SE), higher than the 10
year geomean reported in the most recent status review (6418, 0.19 SE,
2005-2014) (NWFSC 2015). While the population has not been able to
maintain the higher returns it achieved in 2010 and 2013-2015, it has
maintained at or above the ICTRT defined Minimum Abundance Threshold
(3,000) during climate challenges in the ocean and rivers.

![](./media/media/image30.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="2.676388888888889in"}

Figure 27. Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

Productivity, defined in the ICTRT viability criteria as the expected
replacement rate at low to moderate abundance relative to a population's
minimum abundance threshold, is a key measure of the potential
resilience of a natural population to annual environmentally driven
fluctuations in survival (ICTRT 2007). Snake River fall chinook have
been above the ICTRT defined minimum abundance threshold since 2001.
Productivity, as seen in brood year returns per spawner, has been below
replacement (1:1) in recent years (Figure 28), and a longer term,
20-year geometric mean raw productivity of 0.63 is likely an
underestimate of intrinsic productivity. While below replacement returns
are concerning, the long term (15 year) abundance trend is stable and
the population remains well above the minimum abundance threshold set by
the ICTRT. Return rates for brood years 1995−2000 generally exceeded
replacement. Spawner to spawner ratios for brood years 2001−2003 were
below replacement, cycling above replacement for just one year in 2006,
and have been below replacement since 2010. In accordance with the ICTRT
methods, survival at all life stages is accounted for by calculating
productivity at the spawning ground. This includes ocean, downstream and
upstream passage, and freshwater survivals.

![C:\\Users\\margaret.williams\\Desktop\\Status Review 2020\\Fall
Chinook\\usgs\\ Chinook (Snake River fall-run
ESU)-productivity_fig.png](./media/media/image31.png){width="6.5in"
height="2.677470472440945in"}

Figure 28. Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of
the smoothed natural spawning abundance in year *t* - smoothed natural
spawning abundance in year (*t ­­*-- 4). Spawning years on x axis.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population        1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                            Change
  ----------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Snake R. Low.     479 (676)   548 (980)   2578 (8115) 3662        11254       8032        -29
  Mainstem fall                                         (10581)     (37812)     (24812)     (-34)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table 18. Lower Mainstem Snake River fall Chinook salmon population
  risk ratings integrated across the four viable salmonid population
  (VSP) metrics. *Viability Key: HV -- Highly Viable; V -- Viable; M --
  Maintained; HR -- High Risk; Green shaded cells -- meets criteria for
  Highly Viable; Gray shaded cells -- does not meet viability criteria
  (darkest cells are at greatest risk).*

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                       1990-2005          2004-2019
  -------------------------------- ------------------ -------------------
  Snake R. Low. Mainstem fall      0.19 (0.14, 0.25)  0.07 (0.01, 0.13)

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table \-- 5-year geometric mean of raw natural return counts. In
  parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total return counts is
  shown. The geometric mean was computed as the product of counts raised
  to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to 5). A minimum
  of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean. Percent change
  between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on the far right.

Snake River fall Chinook salmon have a very broad ocean distribution and
have been taken in ocean salmon fisheries from central California
through southeast Alaska. They are also harvested in-river in tribal and
non-tribal fisheries. Historically they were subject to total
exploitation rates on the order of 80%. Since they were originally
listed in 1992, fishery impacts have been reduced in both ocean and
river fisheries (Figure 29). Total exploitation rate has been relatively
stable in the range of 40% to 50% since the mid 1990s.

![](./media/media/image32.png){width="5.652777777777778in"
height="3.3055555555555554in"}

Figure 29. Total exploitation rate for Snake River fall Chinook salmon.
Data for marine exploitation rates from the Chinook Technical Committee
model (Calibration 1503) and for in-river harvest rates from the
Columbia River Technical Advisory Committee (TAC 2019 model calibration,
old base period ).

### Spatial structure and diversity

The extant Lower Snake River Fall Chinook population consists of a
spatially complex set of five historical major spawning areas (ICTRT
2007), each of which consists of a set of relatively discrete spawning
patches of varying size (Connor *et al.* 2001; Groves *et al.* 2013).
The primary MaSA in the extant Lower River population is the 96-km Upper
Hells Canyon Reach, extending upriver from the confluence of the Salmon
River to the Hells Canyon Dam site, where the canyon walls narrow and
strongly confine the river bed. A second mainstem Snake River MaSA, the
Lower Hells Canyon, extends 69 km downstream from the Salmon River
confluence to the upper end of the contemporary Lower Granite Dam pool.
The lower mainstem reaches of two major tributaries to the mainstem
Snake River, the Grande Ronde and the Clearwater Rivers, were also
identified by the ICTRT as MaSAs. Both of these river systems currently
supports fall Chinook spawning in the lower reaches. In addition, there
is some historical evidence for production of late spawning Chinook in
spatially isolated reaches in upriver tributaries to each of these
systems.

Historical records and geomorphic assessments support the historical
existence of a fifth MaSA comprised of spawning habitats in the Lower
Tucannon River and the adjacent inundated mainstem Snake River section
associated with Little Goose and Lower Monumental Dams. Several other
tributaries of varying size (e.g., the Salmon and Imnaha Rivers, Alpowa
and Asotin Creeks) enter the mainstem Snake River within each of the
MaSAs defined above. Production in those lower mainstem sections is
considered part of the adjoining mainstem MaSA (ICTRT 2007). Similar to
the Grande Ronde and Clearwater Rivers, anecdotal accounts suggest that
late spawning Chinook may have existed in the lower mainstem of the
South Fork Salmon River (e.g., Connor *et al*., 2016). Historically,
some level of fall Chinook salmon spawning may have occurred in the
lower Snake River in the reach currently inundated by the Ice Harbor Dam
pool (Dauble *et al.* 2003). Spawners using the lowest potential
spawning reaches in the Snake River, currently inundated by Ice Harbor
Dam, could have been associated with either the Lower Snake River
population or a population centered on mainstem Columbia River spawning
areas currently inundated by John Day and McNary Dams.

Annual redd surveys show that fall Chinook salmon spawning occurs in all
five of the historical MaSAs (Arnsberg *et al.* 2020a). PBT has allowed
for spawning ground sampling for parentage analysis. Fidelity studies
have indicated there is spawner dispersal within the population from
different release sites (Cleary, 2018).

The fraction of natural-origin fish on the spawning grounds has remained
relatively stable for the last ten years, with 5-year means of 31%
(2010-2014) and 33% (2015-2019) (Figure 30, Table 17).

![C:\\Users\\margaret.williams\\Desktop\\Status Review 2020\\Fall
Chinook\\usgs\\ Chinook (Snake River fall-run
ESU)-fracwild_fig.png](./media/media/image33.png){width="6.5in"
height="2.677470472440945in"}

Figure 30. Smoothed trend in the estimated fraction of the natural
spawning population consisting of fish of natural origin. Points show
the annual raw estimates.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population               1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ------------------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Snake R. Low. Mainstem   0.58        0.34        0.37        0.31        0.33
  fall                                                                     

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year geometric mean of raw natural spawner counts. This is
  the raw total spawner count times the fraction natural estimate, if
  available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total spawner
  counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that a total
  spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of natural
  spawners available. The geometric mean was computed as the product of
  counts raised to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to
  5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean.
  Percent change between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on
  the far right. Upper panel, long term data set from weir and redd
  surveys. Middle panel, super-population groups from GSI based run
  partitioning of the run-at-large over Lower Granite Dam. Lower panel,
  PIT tag based population estimation method based on mixture model and
  tag detection network across the DPS.

### Biological viability relative to recovery goals

Consistent with the ICTRT's line of reasoning, the recovery plan
contains three recovery scenarios, each consistent with the basic set of
viability objectives developed by the ICTRT and each representing a
potential pathway to achieving low risk for the ESU. Scenario A would
achieve ESU viability with two populations, while Scenarios B and C
describe alternative approaches for achieving viability with the single
extant Lower Snake River population. Each scenario includes specific
criteria and potential metrics for measuring viability characteristics
(NMFS 2017e). The scenarios are summarized briefly below:

Scenario A -- two populations, one highly viable and the other viable:
This scenario would achieve ESU viability by improving the extant Lower
Snake River population to highly viable status and reestablishing the
extirpated Middle Snake River population above the Hells Canyon Dam
Complex to viable status. It reflects a simple, modified application of
the ICTRT's general MPG-level viability criteria (which would require
that both historical populations achieve highly viable status). NMFS
determined that this variation on the ICTRTs general criteria was
appropriate given the spatial and life-history diversity of the extant
Lower Snake River population and in recognition of the complexities
involved in reestablishing the extirpated Middle Snake River population.

Scenario B -- single population measured in the aggregate: Scenario B is
based on an alternative application of the ICTRT's criteria. It would
achieve ESU viability by improving the status of the extant Lower Snake
River population to highly viable with a high degree of certainty. VSP
characteristics would be evaluated in the aggregate (i.e.,
population-wide), across all natural-origin adult spawners. The
requirement for a high degree of certainty that the population is highly
viable would reduce the inherent increased risk associated with a
single-population ESU. The spatial complexity and associated ability to
support life history diversity of the Lower Snake River population
provide opportunities to achieve the basic ICTRT viability objectives
for protection against demographic and catastrophic risk and to provide
for expression of diversity and within-population adaptation to
environmental variation.

Scenario C -- single population with natural production emphasis areas:
Like Scenario B, Scenario C would achieve ESU viability by achieving
high confidence of highly viable status for the Lower Snake River
population. In this scenario, however, rather than evaluating population
status in the aggregate, as under Scenario B, population status would be
evaluated based on having a substantial amount of natural production for
the ESU come from one or two of the five major spawning areas. These
Natural Production Emphasis Areas (NPEAs) would be managed to have a low
percentage of hatchery-origin spawners and to support significant levels
of natural-origin spawners (other major spawning areas could have higher
acceptable levels of hatchery-origin spawners). The NPEAs would make it
possible to directly evaluate the productivity of the natural population
and ensure that a substantial proportion of the population is subject to
natural selection rather than hatchery processes.

While the 10-year geometric mean natural-origin abundance level has been
high, 8920 natural origin spawners (2010-2019) relative to the \>4,200
natural origin spawners for the single population scenario (B) the
population is closer to meeting, the abundance/productivity margin is
insufficient to rate as Very Low Risk given the uncertainty-buffering
requirement under the single population viability scenario because the
most recent 20-year geometric mean raw productivity is 0.63 and the
Recovery Plan calls for ≥1.7 (NMFS 2017b). As a result, the Lower
Mainstem Snake River fall Chinook salmon population is rated at **Low
Risk** (Table 18), rather than Very Low Risk for abundance and
productivity.

In terms of spatial structure and diversity, the Lower Mainstem Snake
River fall Chinook salmon population is rated at **low risk** for Goal A
(allowing natural rates and levels of spatially mediated processes) as
the population shows regular dispersal into all five available spawning
areas. It is rated **moderate risk** for Goal B (maintaining natural
levels of variation) resulting in an overall spatial structure and
diversity rating of **Moderate Risk** (Table 18). In particular, the
rating reflects the relatively high proportion of within-population
hatchery spawners (70%) in all major spawning areas that does not meet
the requirements of either single population recovery plan strategy (B
or C).

### Updated biological risk summary

Overall population viability for the Lower Mainstem Snake River fall
Chinook salmon population is determined based on the combination of
ratings for current abundance and productivity and combined spatial
structure diversity.

+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
|           |               | *        |         |         |          |
|           |               | *Spatial |         |         |          |
|           |               | Str      |         |         |          |
|           |               | ucture/D |         |         |          |
|           |               | iversity |         |         |          |
|           |               | Risk**   |         |         |          |
+===========+===============+==========+=========+=========+==========+
|           |               | **Very   | **Low** | **Mod   | **High** |
|           |               | Low**    |         | erate** |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
| **Abu     | **Very Low**  | **HV**   | **HV**  | **V**   | **M**    |
| ndance/** | (\<1%)        |          |         |         |          |
|           |               |          |         |         |          |
| **Pro     |               |          |         |         |          |
| ductivity |               |          |         |         |          |
| Risk**    |               |          |         |         |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
|           | **Low**       | **V**    | **V**   | **V**   | **M**    |
|           | (1-5%)        |          |         |         |          |
|           |               |          |         | **Lower |          |
|           |               |          |         | Main.   |          |
|           |               |          |         | Snake** |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
|           | **Moderate**  | **M**    | **M**   | **M**   | **HR**   |
|           |               |          |         |         |          |
|           | (6 -- 25%)    |          |         |         |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
|           | **High**      | **HR**   | **HR**  | **HR**  | **HR**   |
|           | (\>25%)       |          |         |         |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+

: Table . 15-year trends in log natural spawner abundance computed from
a linear regression applied to the smoothed wild spawner log abundance
estimate. Only populations with at least 4 wild spawner estimates from
1980 to 2014 are shown and with at least 2 data points in the first 5
years and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

The overall current risk rating for the Lower Mainstem Snake River fall
Chinook salmon population is "viable" (Table 18). The single population
delisting options provided in the draft Snake River Fall Chinook
Recovery Plan would require the population to meet or exceed minimum
requirements for Highly Viable (green shaded combinations) with a high
degree of certainty. The current rating is based on evaluating current
status against the Recovery Plan criteria for the single, aggregate
population scenarios, B or C.

To achieve highly viable status with a high degree of certainty, the
spatial structure/diversity rating needs to be low risk. This status
assessment used the ICTRT framework for evaluating population-level
status in terms of spatial structure and diversity organized around two
major goals: maintaining natural patterns for spatially mediated
processes and maintaining natural levels of variation (ICTRT 2007).

Overall, the status of Snake River fall Chinook salmon has clearly
improved compared to the time of listing. The single extant population
in the ESU is currently meeting the criteria for a rating of "viable"
developed by the ICTRT, but the ESU as a whole is not meeting the
recovery goals described in the recovery plan for the species, which
require the single population to be "highly viable with high certainty"
and/or will require reintroduction of a viable population above the
Hells Canyon Dam complex (NMFS 2017b).

## Snake River Sockeye Salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU

The ESU includes all naturally spawned anadromous and residual sockeye
salmon originating from the Snake River basin, as well as sockeye salmon
from the Redfish Lake Captive Broodstock Program and the Snake River
Sockeye Salmon Hatchery Program (70 FR 37160, June 28, 2005, 85 FR
81822) (Figure 31). This ESU was first listed as endangered under the
ESA in 1991; the listing was reaffirmed in 2005, 2012, and 2016.

![](./media/media/image34.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure 31 \-- Map of the Snake sockeye salmon ESU's spawning and rearing
areas, illustrating populations and major population groups.

### Summary of previous viability conclusions

*2005*

The 2005 BRT assigned the Snake River Sockeye salmon ESU to the "in
danger of extinction" category (Good *et al*. 2005). This high risk
rating was reflected in the scoring by all members of the BRT. The BRT
rated the ESU at extremely high risk across all four basic risk measures
(abundance, productivity, spatial structure and diversity), noting that
only 16 naturally produced adults have been counted since 1991. The BRT
assessment acknowledged that the emergency captive brood program
initiated in 1991 had, "... at least temporarily\...rescued this ESU
from the brink of extinction..." and that ongoing research had
substantially increased biological and environmental information about
the ESU.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) concluded that substantial progress had been made
with the Snake River sockeye salmon captive brood stock based hatchery
program, but natural production levels of anadromous returns remained
extremely low for this ESU. Sufficient numbers of eggs, juveniles and
returning hatchery adults had been available from the captive brood
program to allow for initiation of efforts to evaluate alternative
supplementation strategies in support of re-establishing natural
production of anadromous sockeye. Limnological studies and direct
experimental releases were being conducted to elucidate production
potential in three of the Stanley Basin lakes that were candidates for
sockeye restoration. The availability of increased numbers of adults
supported direct evaluation of lake habitat rearing potential, juvenile
downstream passage survivals and adult upstream survivals. Although the
captive brood program had been successful in providing substantial
numbers of hatchery produced *O. nerka* for use in supplementation
efforts, substantial increases in survival rates across life history
stages were needed in order to re-establish sustainable natural
production (Hebdon *et al.* 2004; Keefer *et al.* 2008). The increased
abundance of hatchery reared Snake River sockeye salmon reduced the risk
of immediate loss, but levels of naturally produced sockeye salmon
returns remained extremely low. As a result, Ford *et al*. (2011)
concluded that although the risk status of the Snake River sockeye
salmon ESU appeared to be on an improving trend in 2010, the new
information considered did not indicate a change in the biological risk
category since the time of the prior BRT status review in 2005.

*2015*

NWFSC (2015) concluded that substantial progress had been made with the
Snake River sockeye salmon captive brood stock based hatchery program,
but natural production levels of anadromous returns remained extremely
low for this ESU. Sufficient numbers of eggs, juveniles and returning
hatchery adults had been available from the captive brood program to
allow for initiation of efforts to evaluate alternative supplementation
strategies in support of re-establishing natural production of
anadromous sockeye. Limnological studies and direct experimental
releases were being conducted to elucidate production potential in three
of the Stanley Basin lakes that were candidates for sockeye restoration.
The availability of increased numbers of adults was helpful for
supporting direct evaluation of lake habitat rearing potential, juvenile
downstream passage survivals and adult upstream survivals. Although the
captive brood program had been successful in providing substantial
numbers of hatchery produced *O. nerka* for use in supplementation
efforts, substantial increases in survival rates across life history
stages were thought to be needed in order to re-establish sustainable
natural production (Hebdon *et al.* 2004; Keefer *et al.* 2008). The
increased abundance of hatchery reared Snake River sockeye salmon
reduced the risk of immediate loss, but levels of naturally produced
sockeye salmon returns remained extremely low and no change in
biological risk category was recommended.

### Description of new data available for this review

Estimates of annual returns are now available through 2019. Adult
returns in 2014 were the highest since the current captive brood based
program began with a total of 1579 counted back to the Stanley basin.
The majority of the adults captured in recent years were trapped at the
Redfish Lake Creek weir; the remaining adults were captured at the
Sawtooth Hatchery weir on the mainstem Salmon River upstream of the
Redfish Lake Creek confluence. In 2015, conditions during migration led
to high mortality within the hydrosystem and an emergency transport of
fish from Lower Granite Dam.

Juvenile outmigrant survivals from release to Lower Granite Dam have
been highly variable. High in-basin mortality in smolts released in
2015-17 was found to be due to water chemistry shock between the
Springfield Hatchery water and the water of Redfish Lake. By 2018,
acclimation studies showed that one week at the intermediate hardness
water at Sawtooth Hatchery was sufficient transition from Springfield to
Redfish Lake (Johnson 2019). Juvenile survival from Lower Granite to
Bonneville Dam from 2008-2013 ranged from 40% to 57% (NMFS 2014b).
Recent years had both higher highs and lower lows. Highs in 2014 and
2018 were at 71% and 64% respectively, but 2015-2017 survivals ranged
from 12% to 37%, the same years with high mortality at release (Widener
*et al.* 2018).

Upstream adult passage survivals from Bonneville Dam to Lower Granite
Dam averaged 60% survival from Bonneville to Lower Granite dams from
2014 to 2018 excluding 2015 when survival was less than 4% due to high
temperatures during the migration period. Adult survivals from Lower
Granite Dam to the Sawtooth Basin averaged 56% for 2014-18, excluding
2015 when it dropped to 14%. Temperatures during the adult upstream
migration in 2015 were unusually high due to low snow pack coupled with
extremely high air temperatures. This resulted in warm water in the
major tributaries and led to an almost complete collapse of the run
between Bonneville and Lower Granite dams (NMFS 2016). These losses
would have affected the SARs for SY 2010 and SY 2011. The implications
of this range in annual survivals for recovery efforts are uncertain and
will depend on the relative frequency of passage conditions across
future years. Given their particular run timing, phenotypic and
behavioral characteristics, Snake River sockeye are particularly
susceptible to high summer temperatures during their adult migration
(Crozier *et al.* 2008; Crozier *et al.* 2020). The conditions in 2015
are expected to become less rare as climate change progresses.

### Abundance and productivity

Adult returns of sockeye salmon to the Sawtooth Basin crashed in 2015
and natural returns have remained low (Figure 32, Table 19). The low
returns of fish collected at the Redfish Lake and Sawtooth weirs have
limited anadromous releases into Redfish Lake to 311 anadromous hatchery
fish in 2016 (Figure 33). No natural anadromous fish have been released
since 2014 as they are required to be spawned in the captive broodstock
program under NMFS Section 10 permit 1454. Captive adult releases have
continued to support spawning in Redfish Lake. Smolt-to-adult return
rates suggest that volitional spawning within Redfish Lake appears to be
important to the success of the Snake River Sockeye Salmon Captive
Broodstock Program (Kozfkay *et al.* 2019).

![](./media/media/image35.emf){width="6.5in"
height="5.058333333333334in"}

Figure \-- Sockeye Salmon Anadromous Returns (Johnson 2020)

In 2015, low snow pack, coupled with extremely high air temperatures
throughout the interior Columbia basin resulted in warm water in the
major tributaries to the lower Snake and Columbia rivers. Temperatures
in the mainstem Columbia River were the highest recorded from roughly
mid-June to mid-July. Adult sockeye salmon, which normally migrate
during this period, sustained heavy losses in the Columbia River and
tributaries, with losses in the mainstem migration corridor exceeding
95% between Bonneville and Lower Granite dams (NMFS 2016).

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population            2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \% Change
  --------------- -- -- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------
  Snake R.              4 (26)      9 (33)      137 (699)   16 (113)    -89 (-84)
  SOCKEYE                                                               

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year mean of fraction wild (sum of all estimates divided
  by the number of estimates). Blanks mean no estimate available in that
  5-year range. Upper panel, long term data set from weir and redd
  surveys. Middle panel, super-population groups from GSI based run
  partitioning of the run-at-large over Lower Granite Dam. Lower panel,
  PIT tag based population estimation method based on mixture model and
  tag detection network across the DPS.

With low sockeye salmon returns to the Sawtooth Basin, the hatchery
program remains in its initial phase with a priority on genetic
conservation and building sufficient returns to support sustained
outplanting (NMFS 2015).

![](./media/media/image36.emf){width="6.5in"
height="3.852777777777778in"}

Figure \-- Adult releases into Redfish Lake of anadromous and captive
fish (Johnson 2020).

Since discontinuing the presmolt program due to relatively poor smolt to
adult return rates, direct smolt plants in the lower section of Redfish
Lake Creek and in the Salmon River (Sawtooth weir) have been increased
and ranged from 423,103 to 882,386 per year in the most recent five year
period (2015-2019) (Figure 34). Survival at planting has improved with
acclimation at Sawtooth Hatchery between Springfield Hatchery and
release into Redfish Lake Creek (Johnson 2019).

![](./media/media/image37.emf){width="6.5in"
height="3.7416666666666667in"}

Figure \-- Estimated annual numbers of Sockeye salmon smolt outmigrants
from the Sawtooth Valley Basin. This includes all hatchery smolt
releases, known outmigrants originating from hatchery presmolt
outplants, and estimates of unmarked juveniles migrating from Redfish,
Alturas, and Petit lakes combined. (Johnson 2020)

Unmarked juvenile *O. nerka* emigrating from the three lake systems have
averaged approximately 22,523 over the most recent 5 years, ranging from
over 38,886 in 2019 to a low of 5,488 in 2017 (Figure 35). A number of
sources could be contributing to the outmigration of unmarked juveniles
including prior years adults passed into Redfish Lake, captive
broodstock adult outplants, egg box outplants, or natural production
from residual spawners (Kozfkay *et al.* 2019).

![](./media/media/image38.emf){width="5.583333333333333in"
height="2.9027777777777777in"}

Figure \-- Estimates of unmarked juveniles migrating from Redfish,
Alturas, and Petit lakes. (Johnson 2020)

Natural production occurring within Redfish Lake had the highest overall
survival rates from the smolt-to-adult life stage despite having lower
emigration survival from the Sawtooth Valley basin to Lower Granite Dam
(Johnson 20120. Increases in smolt abundances have not led to increases
in natural adult returns (Kozfkay 2019).

Annual basin to basin estimates of smolt-to-adult return (SAR) rates
through brood year 2014 (returns completed in 2019) have been generated
for Snake River sockeye through a combination of Parental Based Tagging
(PBT) and a length at age key for fish that assign as unknown. Natural
production from Redfish SARs averaged 0.41% for the five most recent
brood years (2010-2014) that have completed returns, with a ten year
average of 0.86%. Natural production from Pettit and Alturas Lakes, from
anadromous and captive releases averaged 0.86% for the five most recent
brood year returns, and 0.53% for the ten most recent. Hatchery
production smolts averaged 0.30% and 0.43% for Oxbow smolts and 0.08%
and 0.21% for Sawtooth smolts in five and ten year averages respectively
(Johnson 2020). There are two brood years of Springfield smolt releases
completed now, with no adult returns due to the water chemistry
acclimation issues.

The Lower Granite SARs reflect aggregate return rates across two major
downstream migration routes: in-river passage and downstream transport
to below Bonneville Dam. The median estimated survival of juvenile
in-river migrants downriver from Lower Granite Dam through the lower
Snake River to McNary Dam on the mainstem Columbia River was 67% for the
period 1996−2010 and 69% for 2012-2018 (Widener 2019). The median
estimates of juvenile passage survivals for the McNary Dam to the
Bonneville Dam reach (1998−2003, 2006−2010) were 0.54 and (2012-2018)
0.62, which should be interpreted with caution due to small sample sizes
and associated low detection probabilities for many of the individual
year estimates. The median estimated survival from Lower Granite Dam to
Bonneville Dam for the period 2012-2018 was 0.47 (Widener 2019).

Estimated survival in 2019 of Snake River sockeye salmon (hatchery and
wild combined) from the tailrace of Lower Granite Dam to the tailrace of
Bonneville Dam was 43.4% (95% CI: 37.7- 49.9%). Estimated survival in
2019 of Columbia River sockeye salmon (hatchery and wild combined) from
the tailrace of Rock Island Dam to the tailrace of Bonneville Dam was
73.7% (44.7%-121.5%). Both estimates were above their respective
long-term averages of 40.7% and 50.6% ((Zabel 2019).

Sockeye transported through the hydrosystem have a much lower adult
survival than run of the river. Adult migration through the Columbia
reach was half the observed survival for those transported as juveniles
than not (0.30 vs 0.59) (Crozier *et al.* 2020). Fallback occurs at much
higher rates in sockeye than other salmon and has been a significant
predictor of sockeye survival, slowing travel and increasing thermal
exposure (Crozier *et al.* 2018). No transported sockeye survived
upstream migration to Lower Granite Dam in 2015.

Sockeye salmon returning to Redfish Lake in Idaho's Sawtooth Valley
travel a greater distance from the sea, 1,448 kilometers (900 miles), to
a higher elevation (1,996 meters \[6,500 feet\]) than any other Sockeye
Salmon population. They are the southernmost population of Sockeye
Salmon in the world. Adult upstream migration takes place during
mid-summer, exposing the salmon to altered climate conditions such as
higher temperatures and lower flows. Adult upstream passage survivals
through the mainstem Columbia River to the mouth of the Snake River are
assumed to be relatively high during normal conditions based on
inferences from estimates of upstream passage for upper Columbia River
sockeye (Johnson *et al.* 2019). Comparisons of adult sockeye counts at
Ice Harbor and Lower Granite dams indicate direct losses are also low
for passage through the lower Snake River. Adult passage survival
estimates based on passive integrated transponder (PIT) tag detections
at multiple dams also indicate relatively low direct passage mortality
upstream to Lower Granite Dam (Johnson *et al.* 2019). Conditions during
the 2015 adult migration led to a loss of 95% of the run between
Bonneville Dam and Lower Granite Dam (NMFS 2016).

While conditions in 2015, with very warm water temperatures in the
migration corridor and low flows, were uncommonly rare historically,
they are expected to become more common in the future as climate change
progresses (Crozier *et al.* 2020). The reliance on captive broodstock
production inhibits any natural evolutionary changes in run timing.

### Harvest

Ocean fisheries do not significantly impact Snake River sockeye. Within
the mainstem Columbia River, treaty tribal net fisheries and non-tribal
fisheries directed at Chinook salmon do incidentally take small numbers
of sockeye. Most of the sockeye harvested are from the Upper Columbia
River (Canada and Lake Wenatchee), but very small numbers of Snake River
sockeye are taken incidental to summer fisheries directed at Chinook
salmon. In the 1980s fishery impact rates increased briefly due to
directed sockeye fisheries on large runs of Upper Columbia River stocks
(Figure 36).

![](./media/media/image39.emf){width="5.777777777777778in"
height="3.736111111111111in"}

Figure \-- Exploitation rates on Snake River sockeye salmon. Data from
the Columbia River Joint Staff Report (2019)

### Spatial structure and diversity

There is evidence that the historical Snake River Sockeye ESU supported
a range of life history patterns, with spawning populations present in
several of the small lakes in the Sawtooth Basin (NMFS 2015a).
Historical production from Redfish Lake was likely associated with a
lake shoal spawning life history pattern although there may have also
been some level of spawning in Fish Hook Creek (NMFS 2015). Historical
accounts indicate that Alturas Lake Creek supported an early timed
riverine and may have also contained lake shoal spawners (NMFS 2015).

At present, anadromous returns are dominated by production from the
captive spawning component. The ongoing reintroduction program is still
in the phase of building sufficient returns to allow for large scale
reintroduction into Redfish Lake, the initial target for restoring
natural production (NMFS 2015). Initial releases of adult returns
directly into Redfish Lake have been observed spawning in multiple
locations along the lake shore as well as in Fishhook Creek (NMFS 2015).
There is some evidence of very low levels of early timed returns in some
recent years from outmigrating naturally produced Alturas Lake smolts.
At this stage of the recovery efforts, the ESU remains rated at High
Risk for both spatial structure and diversity.

### Biological viability relative to recovery goals

Long term recovery objectives for this ESU are framed in terms of
natural production. At this point in time, natural production of
anadromous Snake River Sockeye remains limited to extremely low levels
in Redfish Lake, one of five Sawtooth Valley lakes believed to have
historically supported production, with a few thousand outmigrants each
year form Pettit and Alturas lakes. As a result, the overall biological
status relative to recovery goals is high risk. Substantial progress has
been made with the Snake River sockeye salmon captive brood stock based
hatchery program.

Limnological studies and direct experimental releases are being
conducted to elucidate production potential in three of the Stanley
basin lakes that are candidates for sockeye restoration. The
availability of increased numbers of adults and juveniles has supported
direct evaluation of lake habitat rearing potential, juvenile downstream
passage survivals, and adult upstream survivals. Although the captive
brood program has been successful in providing substantial numbers of
hatchery produced sockeye salmon for use in supplementation efforts,
substantial increases in survival rates across life history stages must
occur in order to re-establish sustainable natural production (e.g.,
Hebdon *et al*. 2004, Keefer *et al*. 2008). The increased abundance of
hatchery reared Snake River sockeye reduces the risk of immediate loss,
but levels of naturally produced sockeye returns remain extremely low
and at high risk from climate change.

### Updated biological risk summary

In terms of natural production, the Snake River Sockeye ESU remains at
extremely high risk although there has been substantial progress on the
first phase of the proposed recovery approach -- developing a hatchery
based program to amplify and conserve the stock to facilitate
reintroductions. Current climate change modeling supports the extremely
high risk rating with the potential for extirpation in the near future
(Crozier 2020). At this stage of the recovery program there is no basis
for changing the ESU extremely high risk across all four basic risk
measures (abundance, productivity, spatial structure, and diversity)
assigned in prior reviews.

+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
|           |               | *        |         |         |          |
|           |               | *Spatial |         |         |          |
|           |               | Str      |         |         |          |
|           |               | ucture/D |         |         |          |
|           |               | iversity |         |         |          |
|           |               | Risk**   |         |         |          |
+===========+===============+==========+=========+=========+==========+
|           |               | **Very   | **Low** | **Mod   | **High** |
|           |               | Low**    |         | erate** |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
| **Abu     | **Very Low**  | **HV**   | **HV**  | **V**   | **M**    |
| ndance/** | (\<1%)        |          |         |         |          |
|           |               |          |         |         |          |
| **Pro     |               |          |         |         |          |
| ductivity |               |          |         |         |          |
| Risk**    |               |          |         |         |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
|           | **Low**       | **V**    | **V**   | **V**   | **M**    |
|           | (1-5%)        |          |         |         |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
|           | **Moderate**  | **M**    | **M**   | **M**   | **HR**   |
|           |               |          |         |         |          |
|           | (6 -- 25%)    |          |         |         |          |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+
|           | **High**      | **HR**   | **HR**  | **HR**  | **HR**   |
|           | (\>25%)       |          |         |         |          |
|           |               |          |         |         | **Snake  |
|           |               |          |         |         | River    |
|           |               |          |         |         | S        |
|           |               |          |         |         | ockeye** |
+-----------+---------------+----------+---------+---------+----------+

: Table . Summary of viability relative to the ICTRT viability criteria,
grouped by MPG. Natural spawning abundance: most recent 10 year
geometric mean (range). ICTRT productivity: 20 year geometric mean for
parent escapements below 75% of population threshold. Current abundance
and productivity estimates are geometric means. Range in annual
abundance, standard error and number of qualifying estimates for
productivities in parentheses. Populations with no abundance and
productivity data are given a default High A/P Risk rating.

## Snake River Basin Steelhead DPS

### Brief description of DPS

The Snake River steelhead DPS includes all naturally spawned anadromous
*O. mykiss* (steelhead) populations below natural and manmade impassable
barriers in streams in the Snake River Basin of southeast Washington,
northeast Oregon, and Idaho as well as several hatchery programs (; 85
FR 81822). Snake River steelhead are classified as summer run based on
their adult run timing patterns. Much of the freshwater habitat used by
Snake River steelhead for spawning and rearing is warmer and drier than
that associated with other steelhead DPSs. Snake River steelhead spawn
and rear as juveniles across a wide range of freshwater
temperature/precipitation regimes.

![](./media/media/image40.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Snake River steelhead DPS spawning and rearing areas,
illustrating populations and major population groups.

NOAA Fisheries has defined DPSs of steelhead to include only the
anadromous members of this species (70 FR 67130). Our approach to
assessing the current viability of a steelhead DPS is based on
evaluating information about the abundance, productivity, spatial
structure and diversity of the anadromous component of this species
(Good *et al*. 2005). Many steelhead populations along the West Coast of
the U.S. co-occur with conspecific populations of resident rainbow
trout. We recognize that there may be situations where reproductive
contributions from resident rainbow trout may mitigate short-term
extinction risk for some steelhead DPSs (Good *et al*. 2005). We assume
that any benefits to an anadromous population resulting from the
presence of a conspecific resident form will be reflected in direct
measures of the current viability of the anadromous form.

### Summary of previous viability conclusions

*2005*

The 2005 BRT report highlighted moderate risks across all four primary
factors (productivity, natural origin abundance, spatial structure and
diversity) for this DPS. A majority (70%) of the risk assessment points
assigned by the BRT were allocated to the "likely to become endangered"
category. The continued relatively depressed viability of B-run
populations was specifically cited as a particular concern. The BRT
identified the general lack of direct data on spawning escapements in
the individual population tributaries as a key uncertainty, rendering
quantitative assessment of viability for the DPS difficult. The BRT also
identified the high proportion hatchery fish in the aggregate run over
Lower Granite Dam combined with the lack of tributary specific
information on relative spawning levels as a second major uncertainty
and concern. The BRT cited the upturn in return levels in 2000 and 2001
as evidence that the DPS "...is still capable of responding to favorable
environmental conditions." However the report also acknowledged that
abundance levels remain well below interim targets for spawning
aggregations across the DPS.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) concluded that the level of natural production in
the two populations with full data series and the Asotin Creek index
reaches was encouraging, but the viability of most populations in this
DPS remained highly uncertain. Population-level natural origin abundance
and productivity inferred from aggregate data and juvenile indices
indicated that many populations were likely below the minimum
combinations defined by the ICTRT viability criteria. A great deal of
uncertainty remained regarding the relative proportion of hatchery fish
in natural spawning areas near major hatchery release sites. There was
little evidence for substantial change in ESU viability relative to the
2005 BRT review. Overall, therefore, the new information considered in
2010 did not indicate a change in the biological risk category since the
time of the prior BRT status review in 2005.

*2015*

In the last status review (NWFSC 2015), four out of the five MPGs were
not meeting the specific objectives in the draft Recovery Plan based on
the updated viability information available for the review, and the
viability of many individual populations remained uncertain. The Grande
Ronde MPG was tentatively rated as viable, but more specific data on
spawning abundance and the relative contribution of hatchery spawners
for the Lower Grande Ronde and Wallowa populations were recommended to
improve future assessments. The additional monitoring programs
instituted in the early 2000's to gain better information on natural
origin abundance and related factors had significantly improved our
ability to assess viability at a more detailed level. The new
information resulted in an updated view of the relative abundance of
natural origin spawners and life history diversity across the
populations in the DPS. The more specific information on the
distribution of natural returns among stock groups and populations
indicated that differences in abundance/productivity status among
populations may be more related to geography or elevation rather than A
run vs. B run. Based on these results, the major life history category
designations for populations in the DPS were updated. A great deal of
uncertainty still remaind regarding the relative proportion of hatchery
fish in natural spawning areas near major hatchery release sites within
individual populations. Overall, the information analyzed for the 2015
review did not indicate a change in biological risk status from prior
reviews.

### Description of new data available for this review

In the past, adult abundance data series for the Snake River Steelhead
DPS were limited to a set of aggregate estimates (total, A-run and B-run
counted at Lower Granite Dam), estimates for two Grande Ronde
populations (Joseph Creek and Upper Grande Ronde River), and index area
or weir counts for subsections of several other populations. Obtaining
estimates of annual abundance and information on the relative
distribution of hatchery spawners for additional populations within the
DPS has been a high priority. Two projects based on representative
sampling of adult returns at Lower Granite Dam have resulted in
estimates of the numbers of natural returns for additional populations
or groups of populations (QCI 2013; Copeland *et al.* 2015a). One of
those approaches, a mixed stock analysis genetics sampling project, is
generating estimates of natural origin adults originating from ten
different stock groups. The second project generates estimates of the
escapement at the population or watershed level for 21 groups with a
mixture model (DABOM) based on PIT tag detections from a network of
locations across the DPS. All three data sets are presented, generally
as three separate panels for each figure (e.g., fig 39). Since the
mixture model based estimate (DABOM) has only recently been
operationalized, most of the resulting time series are too short to be
used to generate long-term indices of abundance and productivity (e.g.,
15 year trends, Table 21). It is also important to note that the
standardized methods of evaluating abundance and productivity that are
applied across all ESUs/DPSs (Methods section of this report) are
slightly different from the metrics established by the Interior Columbia
River TRT (ICTRT 2007a) -- the primary difference being the time base
for estimating abundance (5 and 15yr versus 10yr) and productivity
measure (5 and 15yr trend, or annual S/S lag 4 versus 20year geometric
mean age structured R/S with 75% MAT threshold).

*Ocean Condition Indices*

Juvenile steelhead are more pelagic than salmon, heading off the
continental shelf soon after entering the ocean in the spring (Burgner
1992). Steelhead migrate seasonally across the North Pacific Ocean,
moving to the north and west in spring and to the south and east, across
the entire Pacific, from autumn through winter (Atcheson *et al.* 2012).
Thus, steelhead ocean survival may be impacted by different factors than
salmon. In fact, recent work has shown steelhead population groupings
from geographic regions have unique smolt survival trends that appear to
be driven by factors affecting them early in their ocean residence
despite steelhead smolts generally being larger than Pacific salmon
smolts when they enter the ocean and all making wide-ranging, off the
continental shelf migrations, rather than remaining more coastal, as
Pacific salmon smolts tend to do (Kendal et al. 2017).

Aggregate annual returns of Columbia River Spring Chinook are correlated
with a range of ocean condition indices including measures of broad
scale physical conditions, local biological indicators, and local
physical factors (Peterson *et al.* 2014a). Work is ongoing to relate
indices of ocean condition to steelhead populations up and down the West
Coast. Steelhead marine survival seems to be related to ocean surface
temperature in the first summer of ocean entry, and populations respond
similarly to spatial patterns of ocean conditions at a rough grain of
250km between ocean entry points (Kendall *et al.* 2017). Therefore,
broad spatial patterns of ocean conditions may not capture the finer
spatial scale of response that steelhead seem to exhibit.

Indicators of ocean condition are highly correlated with each other, and
exhibit strong temporal autocorrelation (). As a result, when indicators
point to conditions that result in poor ocean productivity for salmonid
populations, they do so as a suite of indicators, and for runs of 'good'
or 'bad' years (see Habitat chapter). Historically, ocean conditions
cycled between periods of high and low productivity. However, global
climate change is likely to disrupt this pattern, in general, leading to
a preponderance of low productivity years, with an unknown temporal
distribution (Crozier *et al.* 2019b). Recent (2015-2019) ensemble ocean
indicators rankings include four of the worst seven years in the past
20, meaning that an entire salmon or steelhead generation could have
been subjected to poor ocean productivity conditions.

*Genetic Diversity*

IDFG has compiled an updated assessment of genetic relationship based on
5,967 samples taken from 62 locations within the DPS (Ackerman *et al.*
2014). The results generally support the MPG structure derived by the
ICTRT and identified clear population level structure within
monophyletic clades in the Salmon River and Clearwater groups
({Hargrove, 2021 #2521}, Figure 38). The upper Salmon River genetic
structure has been evaluated further in recent work from IDFW {Powell,
2020 #2522}. Differentiation among samples from the Grande Ronde and
Lower Snake MPGs are less distinct, indicating the possibility of
relatively high rates of exchange among those groups as well as with
production from adjacent drainages. At this time it is not possible to
determine whether those patterns reflect ongoing, past or periodic
exchanges or influences of hatchery fish originating from out of basin
stocks. In addition, stock definitions based on genetic markers (GSI)
from 2009-2019 returns were used to reconstruct individual stock
trajectories from the aggregate LGR counts back to 1985 (Lawry *et al.*
2020).

![C:\\Users\\jhargrove\\AppData\\Local\\Microsoft\\Windows\\INetCache\\Content.Word\\NJ_by_TRT.png](./media/media/image41.png){width="6.0in"
height="5.910633202099738in"}

Figure . Genetic relationships of steelhead collected from locations
across the Snake River basin. The tree is based on Nei's genetic
distance and numbers along branches show number of bootstraps out of
1,000 replicates that support the grouping. Only support greater than
70% is shown. Reproduced from Hargrove et al. (2020).

### Abundance and productivity

Evaluations were done using both a set of metrics corresponding to those
used in prior Biological Review Team (BRT) reviews as well as a set
corresponding to the specific viability criteria based on ICTRT
recommendations for this ESU. The BRT level metrics were consistently
done across all ESUs and DPSs to facilitate comparisons across domains.
Assessments using the ICTRT metrics are described in the Recovery
evaluation section below. Population estimates for the time series
available for this assessment are archived and available through the
NWFSC Salmon Population Summary database.

The five year geometric mean abundance estimates for the populations in
this DPS all show significant declines in the recent past (Table 20, ).
Each of the populations decreased by roughly 50% in the past 5 year
period, resulting in a near zero population change in the past 15 years
(Table 21) for the three populations with sufficiently long data time
series. Hatchery origin spawner estimates for these populations
continued to be low (, ).

![](./media/media/image42.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.431372484689414in"}![](./media/media/image43.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.431372484689414in"}

![](./media/media/image45.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="5.490195756780403in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance estimates. For
some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by earlier data
points not included in the plot. Upper panel, long term data set from
weir and redd surveys. Middle panel, super-population groups from GSI
based run partitioning of the run-at-large over Lower Granite Dam. Lower
panel, PIT tag based population estimation method based on mixture model
and tag detection network across the DPS.

Populations in the Snake River steelhead DPS exhibited similar temporal
patterns in brood year returns per spawner, oscillating with a rough
period of 10yrs (). Return rates for brood years 1995−1999 generally
exceeded replacement (1:1). Spawner to spawner ratios for brood years
2001−2003 were generally well below replacement for many populations,
cycling above replacement during 2005-2010, and strongly below
replacement since 2010. Brood year return rates reflect the combined
impacts of year to year patterns in marine life history stages, upstream
and downstream passage survivals as well as density dependent effects
resulting from capacity or survival limitations on tributary spawning or
juvenile rearing habitats.

![](./media/media/image46.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.431372484689414in"}![](./media/media/image47.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.431372484689414in"}![](./media/media/image49.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="5.490195756780403in"}

Figure . Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of the
smoothed natural spawning abundance in year *t* - smoothed natural
spawning abundance in year (*t ­*4). Spawning years on x axis. Upper
panel, long term data set from weir and redd surveys. Middle panel,
super-population groups from GSI based run partitioning of the
run-at-large over Lower Granite Dam. Lower panel, PIT tag based
population estimation method based on mixture model and tag detection
network across the DPS.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population   MPG      1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                Change
  ------------ -------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Asotin Ck.   Low.     249 (411)   331 (513)   611 (680)   438 (477)   841 (847)   400 (402)   -52
               Snake                                                                            (-53)

                                                                                                

                                                                                                

  Joseph Ck.   Grande   1728 (1728) 1394 (1394) 2533 (2533) 1926 (1926) 2380 (2439) 1936 (1996) -19
               Ronde                                                                            (-18)

  Grande Ronde Grande   1029 (1307) 1443 (1805) 1165 (1284) 1453 (1459) 2572 (2604) 1639 (1655) -36
  R. Up.       Ronde                                                                            (-36)
  Mainstem                                                                                      

                                                                                                

                                                                                                

                                                                                                
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year geometric mean of raw natural spawner counts. This is
  the raw total spawner count times the fraction wild estimate, if
  available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total spawner
  counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that a total
  spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of natural
  spawners available. The geometric mean was computed as the product of
  counts raised to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to
  5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean.
  Percent change between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on
  the far right.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population     MPG          1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                      Change
  -------------- ------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Clearwater R.  Clearwater   1351 (4069) 763 (2298)  2352 (7084) 1504 (4531) 3004 (9048) 1364 (4110) -55
  Low. Mainstem                                                                                       (-55)

  Lochsa &       Clearwater   1170 (1206) 660 (681)   2037 (2100) 1410 (1453) 2109 (2175) 1796 (1852) -15
  Selway R                                                                                            (-15)

  SF Clearwater  Clearwater   1082 (3898) 611 (2202)  1885 (6788) 1314 (4732) 2421 (8719) 1011 (3640) -58
  & Lolo Ck                                                                                           (-58)

  Little         Salmon R.    599 (4251)  338 (2400)  1044 (7403) 683 (4847)  1403 (9947) 400 (2840)  -71
  Salmon/Rapid                                                                                        (-71)
  R.                                                                                                  

  SF Salmon &    Salmon R.    648 (668)   366 (377)   1129 (1164) 757 (780)   1397 (1440) 604 (623)   -57
  Secesh R                                                                                            (-57)

  Low. & MF      Salmon R.    1334 (1375) 753 (777)   2323 (2395) 1578 (1627) 3014 (3107) 1246 (1284) -59
  Salmon R                                                                                            (-59)

  U Salmon       Salmon R.    2393 (4805) 1351 (2713) 4165 (8364) 2625 (5272) 5814        2112 (4240) -64
  Panther Ck to                                                               (11674)                 (-64)
  headwaters                                                                                          
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log natural spawner abundance computed
  from a linear regression applied to the smoothed natural spawner log
  abundance estimate. Only populations with at least 4 wild spawner
  estimates from 1980 to 2014 are shown and with at least 2 data points
  in the first 5 years and last 5 years of the 15-year period. Blank
  cells in the table indicate insuffient data to calculate the trend
  metric.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population       MPG          1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                        Change
  ---------------- ------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Tucannon R.      Low. Snake                                                   679 (985)   460 (695)   -32
                                                                                                        (-29)

  Asotin Ck.       Low. Snake                                                   1224 (1234) 558 (561)   -54
                                                                                                        (-55)

  Clearwater R.    Clearwater                                                   805 (2426)  428 (1289)  -47
  Low. Mainstem                                                                                         (-47)

  Lolo Ck.         Clearwater                                                   402 (1268)  253 (799)   -37
                                                                                                        (-37)

  SF Clearwater R. Clearwater                                                   800 (3100)  388 (1502)  -52
                                                                                                        (-52)

  Grande Ronde R.  Grande Ronde                                                 1213 (1220) 832 (838)   -31
  Up. Mainstem                                                                                          (-31)

  Joseph Ck.       Grande Ronde                                                 1866 (1924) 1063 (1096) -43
                                                                                                        (-43)

  Wallowa R.       Grande Ronde                                                             605 (623)   

  Imnaha R.r       Imnaha                                                       2516 (2594) 1181 (1217) -53
                                                                                                        (-53)

  Little           Salmon                                                       49 (57)     18 (21)     -63
  Salmon/Rapid R.                                                                                       (-63)

  SF Salmon R.     Salmon                                                       1142 (1177) 449 (463)   -61
                                                                                                        (-61)

  Big/Camas/Loon   Salmon                                                       4219 (4350) 1807 (1863) -57
  Ck. Summer                                                                                            (-57)

  Lemhi R. Summer  Salmon                                                       379 (577)   177 (270)   -53
                                                                                                        (-53)

  Pahsimeroi R.    Salmon                                                       183 (481)   41 (107)    -78
                                                                                                        (-78)

                                                                                                        

  Secesh R.        Salmon                                                       158 (163)   80 (82)     -49
                                                                                                        (-50)

  Salmon R. Up.    Salmon                                                       327 (828)   105 (266)   -68
  Mainstemr                                                                                             (-68)
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year mean of fraction natural spawners (sum of all
  estimates divided by the number of estimates). Blanks mean no estimate
  available in that 5-year range.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population          MPG       1990-2005           2004-2019
  ------------------- --------- ------------------- ---------------------
  Asotin Ck.          Low.      0.06 (0.04, 0.08)   0 (-0.05, 0.06)
                      Snake                         

  Joseph Ck.          Grande    0.03 (0.01, 0.05)   -0.01 (-0.06, 0.05)
                      Ronde                         

  Grande Ronde R. Up. Grande    0.03 (0.01, 0.05)   -0.02 (-0.07, 0.04)
  Mainstem            Ronde                         
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Summary Middle Columbia Steelhead DPS viability relative the
  ICTRT viability criteria, grouped by MPG. Natural spawning abundance:
  most recent 10 year geometric mean (range). ICTRT productivity: 20
  year geometric mean for parent escapements below 75% of population
  threshold. Current abundance and productivity estimates are geometric
  means. Range in annual abundance, standard error and number of
  qualifying estimates for productivities in parentheses.

Results from the genetic stock composition monitoring at Lower Granite
Dam beginning with the 2008-2009 cycle year and the systematic PIT tag
program are providing finer scale geographic estimates of steelhead
returns by region of origin. The genetic stock identification based
approach is currently able to break out the aggregate natural returns at
Lower Granite Dam into 10 stock reporting groups. The year to year
patterns in aggregate Snake Basin stocks of wild summer steelhead also
show a steep recent decline (Figure 44). Stocks definitions based on
genetic markers (GSI) (2009-2019 returns) were used to reconstruct
individual stock trajectories from the aggregate LGR counts back to 1985
(Lawry *et al.* 2020).

![](./media/media/image50.emf){width="6.0in"
height="3.7113867016622923in"}

![](./media/media/image51.emf){width="6.0in"
height="3.7304680664916887in"}

Figure . Estimated returns of natural origin steelhead at Lower Granite
Dam by spawning year, 1985-2019. Broken out by Clearwater River (upper)
and Salmon River (lower) stocks. Figures from Lawry et al. 2020.

Run reconstructions of 10 genetically identified stocks from the
aggregate Snake River Steelhead natural origin run show similar patterns
of productivity through time (1985 -- 2019, Figure 42), including the
low productivity (ln R/S \< 0) expected from the declining stock
abundance (Lawry *et al.* 2020).

![](./media/media/image52.emf){width="6.0in"
height="3.716814304461942in"}

![](./media/media/image53.emf){width="6.0in"
height="3.7199398512685913in"}

Figure . Snake River natural origin steelhead aggregate stock
productivity (ln R/S). Upper panel, stocks from the Clearwater River
MPG, lower panel, stocks from the Salmon River MPG. Run reconstruction
for stocks is based on recruits and spawners at Lower Granite Dam.
Stocks were identified by a recent PBT effort (2009-2019), and extended
back to 1985 based on consistent age and stock proportion composition of
the run at large. Figures from Lawry et al. 2020.

As noted above, results from the genetic stock composition monitoring at
Lower Granite Dam beginning with the 2008-2009 cycle year and the
systematic PIT tag program are providing finer scale geographic
estimates of steelhead returns by region of origin. The genetic stock
identification based approach is currently able to break out the
aggregate natural returns at Lower Granite Dam into 10 stock reporting
groups (). Five of those groupings likely have negligible or very low
hatchery contributions. Four of those groupings also have a high
assignment probability based on baseline sensitivity analyses (Ackerman
*et al.* 2014). In addition, the first adult returns that fully
reflected the Snake River Steelhead parental based tagging (PBT) program
for hatchery fish allowed for generating explicit estimates of adult
returns by major hatchery programs beginning with the 1-salt returns in
2011 and 2-salt returns in 2012. In the genetic assignment study,
information on each individual presumptive natural origin fish randomly
sampled at Lower Granite was used to evaluate the proportions of returns
assigned to each stock group that were above and below the B run size
criteria cut off (78 cm) (Ackerman *et al*. 2014).

Smolt to adult return survival estimates (SARs) are generated by the
Columbia River Data Access in Real Time (CBR, 2020) project using PIT
tag detections from all release locations within each population basin
(Columbia River DART, 2020). The SAR indices represent cumulative
marine, nearshore and estuary survival. shows the geometric mean of R/S
and SAR indices for the stocks available across 4 MPGS in the DPS. In
general, these broad-brush descriptors of population processes indicate
relatively robust long-term behavior of the populations. Using the R/S
and SAR indicators by population, it is possible to generate an
indicator of fresh water productivity (FWPI) as a ratio of R/S and SAR.
This quantity can be thought of as an indicator of smolts per spawner,
and thus, the overall population productivity in the freshwater
environment. An FWPI score of \>100 should indicate baseline fresh water
productivity (roughly 100 smolts per female). Clearwater and Lower Snake
populations are performing at below replacement levels of SAR (\< 2%),
The initial assessment by the ICTRT (2007) identified no to low
abundance/productivity gaps for this DPS. In general, the ICTRT
assessment agrees with the long-term productivity metrics (SAR, R/S,
FWPI), with the exception of some lower ocean survivals indicated for
Clearwater and Lower Snake populations.

![](./media/media/image54.png){width="6.5in"
height="3.015277777777778in"}

Figure . Smolt to Adult Return, Recruits per Spawner, and Freshwater
Productivity Index (FWPI) for each of the populations in the ESU.
Geometric means of SAR and R/S are shown for each population, along with
the standard error of the estimate (whiskers represent +/- one standard
error). The time period included in the SAR or R/S indices is the past
20 years, depending on data availability. The FWPI is constructed as a
ratio of the geomean R/S and SAR, and can be thought of as a measure of
smolts per spawner.

### Non-treaty Harvest

Fisheries managers classify Columbia River summer run steelhead into two
aggregate groups, A-run and B-run, based on ocean age at return, adult
size at return and migration timing. A-run steelhead predominately spend
one year at sea, return to freshwater before the end of August,and are
generally associated with low to mid-elevation streams throughout the
Interior Columbia basin. B-run steelhead are larger, with most
individuals returning after 2 years in the ocean and entering freshwater
after August. Both the age (size) and run timing criteria are not
absolute, with the A and B designations being the modes of two clearly
overlapping distributions (Copeland *et al.* 2017). The A-run is
believed to occur throughout the Middle Columbia, Upper Columbia, and
Snake River Basins, while the B-run is believed to occur naturally only
in the Snake RiverDPS, contributing in varying proportions, in the
Clearwater River, Middle Fork Salmon River, and South Fork Salmon River.
The late return timing is most prevalent in the following populations:
Lolo Creek, Lochsa, Selway, South Fork Clearwater, South Fork Salmon,
Secesh, Middle Fork Salmon Lower, Middle Fork Salmon Upper. The size
criteria (FL\>78cm) also distinguishes the majority of returns to these
populations, though to a lesser degree in the two Middle Fork
populations (Bowersox *et al.* 2019).

Steelhead were historically taken in tribal and non-treaty gillnet
fisheries, and in recreational fisheries in the mainstem Columbia River
and in tributaries. In the 1970s, retention of steelhead in non-treaty
commercial fisheries was prohibited, and in the mid 1980s, tributary
recreational fisheries adopted mark-selective regulations. Steelhead are
still harvested in tribal fisheries, in mainstem recreational fisheries,
and there is incidental mortality associated with mark-selective
recreation recreational fisheries. Incidental take on A-run and B-run
Snake River steelhead is less than the allowed 2%, with the W/Sp/Su
management block generally less than 1% and the Fall management block
exhibiting roughly a 1.5% rate (TAC 2020).

Figure NEW. Non-treaty steelhead harvest rates in the Snake River DPS.
Management reporting of steelhead harvest in the Snake River DPS is by
run (A/B) and management time unit (Fall versus Winter/Spring/Summer).
Figure shows the harvest rate for A-run (blue lines) and B-run (orange
line) stocks separated by management time (Fall symbolized with circles,
W/Sp/Su symbolized with triangles). (TAC 2020)

### Spatial structure and diversity

The ICTRT viability criteria adopted in the draft Snake River Management
Unit Recovery plans include explicit criteria and metrics for both
spatial structure and diversity. With one exception, spatial structure
risk ratings for all of the Snake Basin steelhead populations were low
or very low risk given the evidence for distribution of natural
production within populations. The exception was Panther Creek, which
was given a high risk rating for spatial structure based on the lack of
spawning in the upper sections. No new information was provided that
would change those ratings.

ICTRT criteria for evaluating spatial structure within populations are
based on observing evidence of spawning usage across defined spawning
areas within populations, with an emphasis on historically relatively
large contiguous reaches (major spawning areas). Evaluating the
occupancy of steelhead major spawning areas in the Snake River basin is
problematic given the fact that systematic redd surveys are not
routinely conducted due to adverse environmental conditions affecting
accurate counts. IDFG has recently updated estimates of occupancy for
many steelhead populations using juvenile survey data (Copeland *et al.*
2015b). Conducting 11,848 stream surveys in the Clearwater and Salmon
MPGs (1997-2019), IDFG detected juvenile (Age-1 parr) steelhead in 6,487
surveys representing 97 of the 112 spawning areas (major and minor)
accessible by spawning adults. Based on this information, spatial
structure ratings for Snake River steelhead populations were maintained
at the levels assigned in the original ICTRT assessment.

![](./media/media/image55.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.431372484689414in"}![](./media/media/image56.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="3.431372484689414in"}![](./media/media/image57.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="5.490195756780403in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in the estimated fraction of the natural
spawning population consisting of fish of natural origin. Points show
the annual raw estimates. Upper panel, long term data set from weir and
redd surveys. Middle panel, super-population groups from GSI based run
partitioning of the run-at-large over Lower Granite Dam. Lower panel,
PIT tag based population estimation method based on mixture model and
tag detection network across the DPS.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population               1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ------------------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Asotin Ck.               0.65        0.90        0.92        0.99        1.00

                                                                           

                                                                           

  Joseph Ck.               1.00        1.00        1.00        0.98        0.97

  Grande Ronde R. Up.      0.80        0.91        1.00        0.99        0.99
  Mainstem                                                                 

                                                                           

                                                                           

                                                                           
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year geometric mean of raw wild spawner counts. This is
  the raw total spawner count times the fraction wild estimate, if
  available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total spawner
  counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that a total
  spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of wild
  spawners available. The geometric mean was computed as the product of
  counts raised to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to
  5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean.
  Percent change between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on
  the far right. Sp-spring-run, Fa-fall-run, LFR-late fall-run.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Clearwater R. Low.        0.33        0.33        0.33        0.33        0.33
  Mainstem                                                                  

  Lochsa & Selway R         0.97        0.97        0.97        0.97        0.97

  SF Clearwater & Lolo Ck   0.28        0.28        0.28        0.28        0.28

  Little Salmon/Rapid R.    0.14        0.14        0.14        0.14        0.14

  SF Salmon & Secesh R      0.80        0.91        1.00        0.99        0.99

  Low. & MF Salmon R        0.97        0.97        0.97        0.97        0.97

  U Salmon Panther Ck to    0.50        0.50        0.50        0.50        0.50
  headwaters                                                                
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends (slope) in log wild spawner abundance
  computed from a linear regression applied to the smoothed wild spawner
  log abundance estimate versus year. In parentheses are the upper and
  lower 95% CIs. Only populations with at least 4 wild spawner estimates
  and with at least 2 data points in the first 5 years and last 5 years
  of the 14-year ranges are shown.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population              1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ----------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Tucannon R.                                                 0.69        0.68

  Asotin Ck.                                                  0.99        1.00

  Clearwater R. Low.                                          0.33        0.33
  Mainstem                                                                

  Lolo Ck.                                                    0.32        0.32

  SF Clearwater R.                                            0.26        0.26

  Grande Ronde R. Up.                                         1.00        0.99
  Mainstem                                                                

  Joseph Ck.                                                  0.97        0.97

  Wallowa R.                                                  0.97        0.97

  Imnaha R.                                                   0.97        0.97

  Little Salmon/Rapid R.                                      0.86        0.86

  SF Salmon R.                                                0.97        0.97

  Big/Camas/Loon Ck.                                          0.97        0.97

  Lemhi R.                                                    0.66        0.66

  Pahsimeroi R.                                               0.38        0.38

                                                                          

  Secesh R.                                                   0.97        0.97

  Salmon R. Up. Mainstem                                      0.40        0.40
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year mean of fraction natural-origin spawners (sum of all
  estimates divided by the number of estimates) for Lower Columbia River
  Chinook salmon ESU populations. Blanks mean no estimate available in
  that 5-year range.

### Biological viability relative to recovery goals

The Interior Columbia Basin Technical Recovery Team (ICTRT) identified
24 extant populations within this DPS, organized into 5 major population
groups (ICTRT 2003). The ICTRT also identified a number of potential
historical populations associated with tributary habitat above the Hells
Canyon Dam complex on the mainstem Snake River, a barrier to anadromous
migration. The five major population groups (MPGs) with extant
populations are: the Lower Snake River MPG (2 populations); the Grande
Ronde MPG (4 populations); the Imnaha River population/MPG; the
Clearwater River MPG (5 extant populations, 1 extirpated); and the
Salmon River MPG (12 populations). In addition, the ICTRT concluded that
small tributaries entering the mainstem Snake River below Hells Canyon
Dam may have historically been part of a larger population with a core
area currently cut off from anadromous access. That population would
have been part of one of the historical upstream MPGs.

NMFS recovery planning for the Snake River drainage is organized around
a subset of management unit plans corresponding to State boundaries. A
tributary recovery plan for one of the major management units (MUs), the
Lower Snake River tributaries within Washington state boundaries, was
developed under the auspices of the Lower Snake River Recovery Board and
was accepted by NOAA Fisheries in 2005. The LSRB Plan provides recovery
criteria, targets and tributary habitat action plans for the two
populations of Spring/Summer Chinook in the Lower Snake MPG along with
the Touchet River (Mid-Columbia Steelhead DPS) and the Washington
sections of the Grande Ronde River. A DPS-wide Recovery Plan was
completed in 2017, continaing MU plansfor the Oregon and Idaho
drainages, each covering the respective MPGs contained within those
states. Viability criteria recommended by the ICTRT were adopted
formulating recovery objectives within each of the management unit
planning efforts.

The recovery criteria are hierarchical in nature, with DPS level
criteria being based on the viability of natural origin steelhead
assessed at the population level. Under the ICTRT approach, population
level assessments are based on a set of metrics designed to evaluate
risk across the four viable salmonid population elements -- abundance,
productivity, spatial structure and diversity (McElany *et al*. 2000).
The ICTRT approach calls for comparing estimates of current natural
origin abundance (measured as a 10 year geometric mean of natural origin
spawners) and productivity (estimate of return per spawner at low to
moderate parent spawning abundance) against predefined viability curves.
In addition, the ICTRT developed a set of specific criteria (metrics and
example risk thresholds) for assessing the spatial structure and
diversity risks based on current information representing each specific
population.

#### Snake River Steelhead DPS: NOAA Recovery Plan Scenario

The Recovery Plan recommends that each extant MPG should include viable
populations totaling at least half of the populations historically
present, with all major life history groups represented (NMFS 2017). The
remaining populations also must achieve at least maintained status. In
addition, the viable populations within an MPG should include
proportional representation of large and very large populations
historically present. Within any particular MPG, there may be several
specific combinations of populations that could satisfy the ICTRT
criteria.

*Lower Snake River MPG:* Both populations (Tucannon River and Asotin
Creek) in this MPG are targeted for maintained status, as an aggregate
stock, with the Asotin meeting the criteria for viable, based on the
population specific abundance and productivity data.

Population level abundance data sets are not available for the entirety
of either of the two populations in this MPG; however, a data series for
a large subarea within the Asotin Creek population is available ().
Based on recent year PIT tag detections and the Lower Granite genetic
stock composition monitoring, Asotin Creek is receiving substantial
inputs of adult returns from the Tucannon River and potentially other
areas (both natural origin and hatchery) in the lower Snake River
region. The actual proportional contribution of hatchery spawners to
total spawning is not known. Population level spawner escapement
estimates are not available for the Tucannon River population, but
indications are that numbers of spawning steelhead in the system are low
(Bumgarner & Dedloff 2015). One contributing factor is an apparent high
overshoot rate of returning adults past their natal stream.

The ICTRT rated both populations at moderate risk for the integrated
spatial structure and diversity criteria. The moderate risk rating was
driven by two of the diversity factors -- phenotypic patterns and
hatchery influence (spawner composition). The risk rating for phenotypic
traits reflected uncertainty as to whether traits of the current
populations are consistent with the historical patterns or with
unaltered reference populations in a similar habitat, geologic, and
hydrologic setting. No additional or updated information is available
for this review.

*Grande Ronde MPG*: Improvements in natural production are planned for
all four populations in this MPG. Given their current viability, it is
expected that Joseph Creek and the Upper Grande Ronde River populations
are the most likely to satisfy the MPG level requirement for one highly
viable and one viable population. The average abundance levels have
decreased from the prior review period and the productivity remains
high, though declining from the past review period, A/P Risk ratings
still fall in the Low to Very Low region of the viability curves for
their respective size categories (Basic and Large respectively). One of
the aggregate natural origin stock groups identified based on genetic
sampling at Lower Granite Dam includes all four Grande Ronde populations
(Copeland *et al.* 2015a). While, the relatively high misclassification
rates associated with this group precluded developing reliable direct
estimates of annual escapements for this group for use in this review,
the results indicate that the estimated returns to Joseph Creek and the
Upper Grande Ronde would account for the majority of the aggregate
Grande Ronde run. The Wallowa and Lower Grande Ronde populations are
given a High A/P risk rating reflecting the lack of population specific
data and the overall downward trends of populations in the DPS. More
specific data on annual returns would be needed to assign updated
specific abundance and productivity ratings to these two populations.

The combined spatial structure and diversity metric for all four
populations in this MPG remain unchanged from the last review. The
Grande Ronde Steelhead MPG is rated as Maintained status. Both Joseph
Creek and the Upper Grande Ronde populations meet the criteria for
Viable, and the remaining two populations are provisionally rated as
High Risk based on the limited abundance and productivity data.

*Imnaha River MPG*: The Imnaha River population will need to meet highly
viable status for this one population MPG to be rated as viable under
the basic ICTRT criteria.

The Imnaha River Steelhead population was rated was rated as maintained
in the prior review, based on moderate ratings for abundance and
productivity and spatial structure/diversity. The Imnaha River
constitutes one of the stock groups identified in the Lower Granite
genetic stock identification program, allowing an extrapolated time
series for this population to be generated based on the aggregate Lower
Granite returns. This projected population data indicates that the
Imnaha population is performing at a Very Low risk level over the recent
past. Information from the PBT hatchery study indicates that the number
of hatchery returns from Imnaha River releases that remain available to
spawn after harvest and weir removals may be substantial. While it is
likely that those returns are concentrated in one section of the
population (Big Sheep Creek), the relative distribution of hatchery and
natural spawners is uncertain. Estimates of hatchery proportions in the
upper end of the mainstem Imnaha are relatively low (Harbeck *et al.*
2015), but there is uncertainty about proportions in the lower mainstem
Imnaha River.

Based on the information currently available, the Imnaha steelhead
population is not meeting the Highly Viable rating for a single
population MPG called for in the draft Snake River Recovery Plan.
Achieving a Highly Viable rating would require achieving a Very Low risk
rating for abundance and productivity and a Low overall risk rating for
spatial structure and diversity. Additional information on the relative
distribution of hatchery spawners could change the current diversity
risk rating.

*Clearwater River MPG*: This MPG includes five extant and one extirpated
(North Fork Clearwater River) populations. The recovery scenario for
this MPG calls for recovery of the Lower Clearwater River (large size),
along with the Lochsa River and the Selway River.

The genetic stock identification based run reconstructions allow a
partitioning of the MPG into three stocks, the Lower Mainstem
Clearwater, the South Fork Clearwater, and the aggregate returns to the
watersheds of the Upper and Middle Fork Clearwater (including Lolo,
Selway and Lochsa). The assignment of these stocks is reasonably strong,
but the TRT populations do not map precisely to monophyletic clades
(e.g., Lolo Ck falls within the SF Clearwater clade as does one
tributary of the Lower Mainstem Clearwater). Nonetheless, the overall
topology allows a robust abundance and productivity assessment based on
the resultant run reconstruction. The Lower Mainstem and South Fork
Clearwater aggregate stocks are stable from the last viability review
and at a Very Low risk designation, both due to high long term abundance
and productivity. The spatial structure and diversity evaluations remain
unchanged from the last viability review (Low and Moderate,
respectively), resulting in Highly Viable and Viable designations for
the Lower Mainstem and South Fork Clearwater River stocks. The aggregate
"upper Clearwater River" stock, functionally consisting of the Lolo
Creek, Selway and Lochsa River populations rates as Moderate risk for
abundance and productivity, with a relatively robust and stable
abundance though declining productivity. Based on the previous spatial
structure and diversity ratings, the overall risk for the aggregate
stock is Maintained.

Based on the updated risk assessments, the Clearwater MPG does meet the
ICTRT criteria for a viable MPG. Although the population specific PIT
tag based population trajectories have yet to be run for a sufficiently
long period, they will have by the next viability review and will be
necessary to confirm the MPG status, especially considering the recent
sharp downturns of the populations across the DPS.

*Salmon River MPG*: This relatively large MPG includes 12 extant
populations. The Recovery Plan identifies six populations to prioritize
for viable status across this MPG. The recovery scenario is consistent
with the ICTRT recommendations and includes two Middle Fork populations,
the South Fork River, Chamberlain Creek, Panther Creek and the North
Fork Salmon River populations. The proposed scenario for this MPG
includes consideration for historical population size, inclusion of
populations exhibiting a range of run timing, and achieving a
distribution of viable populations across the geographical extent of the
MPG; specifically that beyond the priority populations, all remaining
populations whould be maintained (less than 25% risk) with sufficient
abundance, productivity, spatial structure, and diversity to provide for
ecological functions and to preserve options for species' recovery.

Estimates of natural origin abundance based on genetic stock
identification and run reconstruction from the aggregate Lower Granite
returns are available for four population subgroups within this MPG, the
Lower Salmon River (1 population) the South Fork stock group (2
populations) and the Middle Fork stock group (3 populations), and the
Upper Salmon River stock group (6 populations). These groupings and the
resultant run reconstructions provide robust information to make
viability assessment assignments, but including the population specific
PIT tag based population trajectories, when they have been run for a
sufficiently long period, will be critical to confirm any population,
MPG and DPS risk designation.

In prior reviews the three Middle Fork Salmon River and the two South
Fork Salmon River populations were each assigned moderate risk ratings
for abundance/productivity based on the aggregate abundance time series.
Based on the updated genetic stock composition run reconstruction
returns and productivity, these two stock groups should remain at a
Moderate demographic risk category.

The Little Salmon River population is identified as a distinct single
population group within the current GSI mixture analyses. The recent 10
year geometric mean natural origin returns at Lower Granite dam
allocated to this stock group, and the productivity based on the run
reconstruction indicate that this population is at Very Low demographic
risk. However, the potential for hatchery spawner contributions into
natural areas is high, therefore the resultant productivity for this
population based on adult recruit to total spawner estimates should be
further evaluated.

The remaining populations within the Salmon River MPG fall within a
single aggregate stock group in the GSI analysis (North Fork Salmon
River, Pahsimeroi River, Lemhi River, East Fork Salmon River and Upper
Salmon River). While the population delineation within the group does
not align precisely with the TRT designations, the MPG is monophyletic
and distinct from other Salmon River stock groups. More recent
information on Panther Creek, shows that this population also clusters
with the upper Salmon River populations {Vu, 2015 #2523}. The aggregate
abundance and productivity risk is Moderate for this stock group, based
on the low long term abundance, but relatively high productivity.
Preliminary run reconstructions based on PBT estimates of hatchery
returns at Lower Granite Dam adjusted for subsequent fishery and
hatchery weir removals indicate that substantial numbers of hatchery
origin adults escape and are available to spawn in natural areas. The
distribution of these potential spawners relative to natural origin
adults is not well understood.

+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| **Pop     | **A |      |       |      | **S |     |      | **Ov  |
| ulation** | bun |      |       |      | pat |     |      | erall |
|           | dan |      |       |      | ial |     |      | Risk  |
|           | ce/ |      |       |      | Str |     |      | Rat   |
|           | Pro |      |       |      | uct |     |      | ing** |
|           | duc |      |       |      | ure |     |      |       |
|           | tiv |      |       |      | and |     |      |       |
|           | ity |      |       |      | Div |     |      |       |
|           | Met |      |       |      | ers |     |      |       |
|           | ric |      |       |      | ity |     |      |       |
|           | s** |      |       |      | Met |     |      |       |
|           |     |      |       |      | ric |     |      |       |
|           |     |      |       |      | s** |     |      |       |
+===========+=====+======+=======+======+=====+=====+======+=======+
|           | **  | **   | ***   | *    | *   | *** | *    |       |
|           | *IC | *Nat | ICTRT | **In | **N | Div | **In |       |
|           | TRT | ural | Produ | tegr | atu | ers | tegr |       |
|           | M   | Spaw | ctivi | ated | ral | ity | ated |       |
|           | ini | ning | ty*** | A/P  | Pro | R   | SS/D |       |
|           | mum | Abun |       | Ris  | ces | isk | Ris  |       |
|           | Thr | danc |       | k*** | ses | *** | k*** |       |
|           | esh | e*** |       |      | R   |     |      |       |
|           | old |      |       |      | isk |     |      |       |
|           | *** |      |       |      | *** |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Tucannon  | 1,  | NA   | NA    | High | Low | Mo  | Mode | High  |
| River     | 000 |      |       |      |     | der | rate |       |
|           |     |      |       |      |     | ate |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Lower     | 1   | 750  | 2.52  | Mode | Low | Mo  | Mode | Maint |
| Snake     | 500 |      |       | rate |     | der | rate | ained |
| River     |     | (sd  | (     |      |     | ate |      |       |
| (         |     | 751) | 0.21, |      |     |     |      |       |
| Tucannon, |     |      | 1     |      |     |     |      |       |
| Asotin)   |     |      | 2/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Asotin    | 500 | 574  | 1.63  | Low  | Low | Mo  | Mode | V     |
| Creek     |     |      |       |      |     | der | rate | iable |
|           |     | (sd  | (0.41 |      |     | ate |      |       |
|           |     | 389) | 3/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
|           |     |      |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Lower     | 1,  | NA   | NA    | High | Low | Mo  | Mode | High  |
| Grande    | 000 |      |       |      |     | der | rate |       |
| Ronde     |     |      |       |      |     | ate |      |       |
| River     |     |      |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Joseph    | 500 | 2327 | 1.21  | Low  | V   | Low | Low  | V     |
| Creek     |     |      |       |      | ery |     |      | iable |
|           |     | (sd  | (0.14 |      | Low |     |      |       |
|           |     | 1    | 0/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     | 291) |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Upper     | 1   | 2192 | 2.01  | Very | V   | Mo  | Mode | V     |
| Grande    | 500 |      |       | Low  | ery | der | rate | iable |
| Ronde     |     | (sd  | (0.35 |      | Low | ate |      |       |
|           |     | 1    | 6/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     | 227) |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Wallowa   | 1,  | NA   | NA    | High | V   | Low | Low  | High  |
| River     | 000 |      |       |      | ery |     |      |       |
|           |     |      |       |      | Low |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
|           |     |      |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Imnaha    | 1,  | 1811 | 2.36  | Very | V   | Mo  | Mode | V     |
| River     | 000 |      |       | Low  | ery | der | rate | iable |
|           |     | (sd  | (0.21 |      | Low | ate |      |       |
|           |     | 1    | 9/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     | 151) |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
|           |     |      |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Lower     | 1,  | 2026 | 2.32  | Very | V   | Low | Low  | H     |
| Main.     | 500 |      |       | Low  | ery |     |      | ighly |
| C         |     | (sd  | (0.18 |      | Low |     |      | V     |
| learwater |     | 1    | 9/20) |      |     |     |      | iable |
| R.        |     | 382) |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| SF        | 1,  | 1564 | 2.80  | Very | Low | Mo  | Mode | V     |
| C         | 000 |      |       | Low  |     | der | rate | iable |
| learwater |     | (sd  | (0.23 |      |     | ate |      |       |
| R.        |     | 1    | 8/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     | 275) |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Lolo      | 500 | 1946 | 1.82  | Mode | Low | Mo  | Mode | Maint |
| Creek     |     |      |       | rate |     | der | rate | ained |
|           |     | (sd  | (0.19 |      |     | ate |      |       |
|           |     | 1    | 1     |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     | 426) | 5/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Selway R. | 1,  |      |       | Mode | V   | Low | Low  |       |
|           | 000 |      |       | rate | ery |     |      |       |
|           |     |      |       |      | Low |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Lochsa R. | 1,  |      |       | Mode | V   | Low | Low  |       |
|           | 000 |      |       | rate | ery |     |      |       |
|           |     |      |       |      | Low |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
|           |     |      |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Little    | 500 | 750  | 2.53  | Very | Low | Mo  | Mode | V     |
| Salmon R. |     |      |       | Low  |     | der | rate | iable |
|           |     | (sd  | (0.21 |      |     | ate |      |       |
|           |     | 751) | 1     |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     |      | 2/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| South     | 1,  | 919  | 1.85  | Mode | V   | Low | Low  | Maint |
| Fork      | 000 |      |       | rate | ery |     |      | ained |
| Salmon R. |     | (sd  | (0.19 |      | Low |     |      |       |
|           |     | 816) | 1     |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     |      | 5/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Secesh R. | 500 |      |       | Mode | Low | Low | Low  | Maint |
|           |     |      |       | rate |     |     |      | ained |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Ch        | 500 | 1937 | 2.47  | Mode | Low | Low | Low  | Maint |
| amberlain |     |      |       | rate |     |     |      | ained |
| Creek     |     | (sd  | (0.15 |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     | 1    | 1     |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     | 566) | 0/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Lower     | 1,  |      |       | Mode | V   | Low | Low  | Maint |
| Middle    | 000 |      |       | rate | ery |     |      | ained |
| Fork      |     |      |       |      | Low |     |      |       |
| Salmon R. |     |      |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Upper     | 1,  |      |       | Mode | V   | Low | Low  | Maint |
| Middle    | 000 |      |       | rate | ery |     |      | ained |
| Fork      |     |      |       |      | Low |     |      |       |
| Salmon R. |     |      |       |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Panther   | 500 | 3502 | 1.88  | Mode | H   | Mo  | High | High  |
| Creek     |     |      |       | rate | igh | der |      |       |
|           |     | (sd  | (0.17 |      |     | ate |      |       |
|           |     | 2    | 1     |      |     |     |      |       |
|           |     | 562) | 6/20) |      |     |     |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| North     | 500 |      |       | Mode | Low | Mo  | Mode | Maint |
| Fork      |     |      |       | rate |     | der | rate | ained |
| Salmon R. |     |      |       |      |     | ate |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Lemhi R.  | 1,  |      |       | Mode | Low | Mo  | Mode | Maint |
|           | 000 |      |       | rate |     | der | rate | ained |
|           |     |      |       |      |     | ate |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| P         | 1,  |      |       | Mode | Mo  | Mo  | Mode | Maint |
| ahsimeroi | 000 |      |       | rate | der | der | rate | ained |
| R.        |     |      |       |      | ate | ate |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| East Fork | 1,  |      |       | Mode | V   | Mo  | Mode | Maint |
| Salmon R. | 000 |      |       | rate | ery | der | rate | ained |
|           |     |      |       |      | Low | ate |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+
| Up Main.  | 1,  |      |       | Mode | V   | Mo  | Mode | Maint |
| Salmon R. | 000 |      |       | rate | ery | der | rate | ained |
|           |     |      |       |      | Low | ate |      |       |
+-----------+-----+------+-------+------+-----+-----+------+-------+

: Table . Current 5-year geometric mean of raw natural-origin spawner
abundances and recovery targets (Dornbush 2013) for Lower Columbia River
Chinook salmon demographically independent populations (DIPs).  Numbers
in () represent total (hatchery + origin) spawners.  Colors indicate the
relative proportion of the recovery target currently obtained: red
(\<10%), orange (10%\>x\<50%), yellow (50%\>x\<100%), green (\>100%).

### Updated biological risk summary

Five out of the five MPGs are not meeting the specific objectives in the
draft Recovery Plan based on the updated viability information available
for this review, and the viability of many individual populations
remains uncertain (Table 23). The Grande Ronde and Clearwater MPG are
rated as Maintained, but more specific data on spawning abundance and
the relative contribution of hatchery spawners for the Lower Grande
Ronde and Wallowa populations would improve future assessments, as would
population specific demographics in the upper Clearwater River stock
group. The additional monitoring programs instituted in the early 2000's
to gain better information on natural origin abundance and related
factors have significantly improved our ability to assess viability at a
more detailed level. The new information has resulted in an updated view
of the relative abundance of natural origin spawners and life history
diversity across the populations in the DPS. However, a great deal of
uncertainty still remains regarding the relative proportion of hatchery
fish in natural spawning areas near major hatchery release sites within
individual populations. Overall, the information analyzed for this
viability review does not indicate a change in biological risk status of
the DPS.

Of particular note, the updated, population level abundance estimates
have made very clear the recent (last five years) sharp declines that
are extremely worrisome, were they to continue. The viability metrics
used in these analyses (standardized PNW-wide and ICTRT) are
intentionally based on long-time periods (10-20 year geometric means),
to buffer against the rapid swings in abundance that salmon and
steelhead populations are knowns to exhibit. While these filtering
approaches intentionally result in muted responses to rapid abundance
change, they also can lag in raising concerns about dramatic change in
population status. Rapid response metrics, or metrics that are more
keyed to system wide synchronous behavior of population productivity may
be appropriate in these situations.

## Middle Columbia River steelhead DPS

### Brief description of DPS

The Middle Columbia River steelhead distinct population segment (DPS)
includes all naturally spawning populations of steelhead (*Oncorhynchus
mykiss*) spawning in tributaries upstream and exclusive of the Wind
River (Washington) and the Hood River (Oregon), excluding the Upper
Columbia River tributaries (upstream of Priest Rapids Dam) and the Snake
River (85 FR 81822, Figure 45). The Middle Columbia River steelhead DPS
was listed as threatened by NOAA Fisheries in 1999, with that listing
designation being affirmed in 2006, 2012 and 2016. 

![](./media/media/image58.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Map of the Middle Columbia River steelhead DPS's spawning and
rearing areas, illustrating populations and major population groups.

NOAA Fisheries has defined DPSs of steelhead to include only the
anadromous members of this species (70 FR 67130). Our approach to
assessing the current viability of a steelhead DPS is based on
evaluating information on the abundance, productivity, spatial structure
and diversity of the anadromous component of this species (Good *et al*.
2005; 70 FR 67130). Many steelhead populations along the West Coast of
the U.S. co-occur with conspecific populations of resident rainbow
trout. We recognize that there may be situations where reproductive
contributions from resident rainbow trout may mitigate short-term
extinction risk for some steelhead DPSs (Good *et al*. 2005; 70 FR
67130). We assume that any benefits to an anadromous population
resulting from the presence of a conspecific resident form will be
reflected in direct measures of the current viability of the anadromous
form.

### Summary of previous viability conclusions

*2005*

Results of a BRT review of the viability of the Middle Columbia
Steelhead DPS were summarized in Good *et al*. (2005). A slight majority
(51%) of the cumulative scores across the BRT were for assigning this
DPS to the "threatened but not endangered" category. The remaining votes
(49%) were for the "not likely to become endangered" designation. The
BRT noted that this particular DPS was difficult to evaluate. Reasons
cited included: the wide range in relative abundance for individual
populations across the DPS (e.g., spawning abundance in the John Day and
Deschutes basins had been relatively high, while returns to much of the
Yakima River drainage had remained relatively low); chronically high
levels of hatchery strays into the Deschutes River, and a lack of
consistent information on annual spawning escapements in some
tributaries (e.g. Klickitat River). In addition, resident *O. mykiss*
are believed to be very common throughout this DPS. The BRT assumed that
the presence of resident *O. mykiss* below anadromous barriers mitigated
extinction risk to the DPS to some extent, but a slight majority of BRT
members concluded that significant threats to the anadromous component
remained. 

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) concluded that there had been improvements in the
viability ratings for some of the component populations, but the
Mid-Columbia Steelhead DPS was not currently meeting the viability
criteria in the Mid-Columbia Steelhead Recovery Plan. In addition,
several of the factors cited by the 2005 BRT (Good *et al*. 2005)
remained as concerns or key uncertainties. Natural origin spawning
estimates were highly variable relative to minimum abundance thresholds
across the populations in the DPS. Updated information indicated that
stray levels into at least the Lower John Day River population were also
high. Returns to the Yakima River basin and to the Umatilla and Walla
Walla Rivers had been higher over the most recent brood cycle while
natural origin returns to the John Day River had decreased. Out of basin
hatchery stray proportions, although reduced, remained very high in the
Deschutes River basin. Overall the new information considered in 2010
did not indicate a change in the biological risk category since the time
of the last BRT status review in 2005.

*2015*

For the 2015 review, there were improvements in the viability ratings
for some of the component populations, but the Mid-Columbia River
Steelhead DPS was not meeting the viability criteria described in the
Mid-Columbia Steelhead Recovery Plan (NWFSC 2015). In addition, several
of the factors cited by the 2010 BRT remained as concerns or key
uncertainties. Natural origin returns to the majority of populations in
two of the four MPGs in this DPS had increased modestly relative to the
levels reported in the previous five year review. Abundance estimates
for 2 of 3 populations with sufficient data in the remaining two MPGs
(Eastside Cascades and Umatilla/Walla-Walla) were marginally lower.
Natural-origin spawning estimates were highly variable relative to
minimum abundance thresholds across the populations in the DPS. Three of
the four MPGs in this DPS included at least one population rated at low
risk for abundance and productivity. In general, the majority of
population level viability ratings remained unchanged from prior reviews
for each MPG within the DPS. 

### Description of new data available for this review

Updated abundance and hatchery contribution estimates have been provided
by regional fisheries managers for each of the 17 long term data series
considered in prior status reviews. In addition, data is now available
for the recently accessible habitat in the White Salmon River due to the
removal of Condit Dam. Spawning surveys conducted by the YKFP for return
years 2012-2019 show low numbers, but consistent use of the watershed by
spawning steelhead (Zendt 2020). The consistent occupancy of previously
extirpated populations (e.g., White Salmon) and the documentation of use
in other, previously marginalized populations (e.g., Rock Creek) warrant
further evaluation with respect to these populations' potential role in
the DPS recovery strategy.

Abundance estimates for the Yakima MPG populations continue to be based
on steelhead counts at Prosser Dam on the mainstem Yakima below all four
of the populations in this MPG. Population specific abundance estimates
are based on a run reconstruction allocation method that incorporates
average distributions observed in a three year radio tagging study
(Frederiksen *et al.* 2014) in the early 1990s along with Roza Dam
counts and redd counts in Satus and Toppenish Creeks. Population
specific estimates of the 2012-2014 brood year escapements were
generated from a three year radio-tagging study. In addition, two other
methods were applied over the duration of that study, a genetic stock
identification approach and a PIT tag based tracking program.
Preliminary results suggest that the PIT tag based approach, which
involves proportional tagging at Prosser combined with strategically
placed upstream arrays, would be a viable long term strategy, as has
been demonstrated in the Upper Columbia and Snake River steelhead DPSs.
The continued expansion of the network of PIT tag detection sites within
the Yakima River basin is the necessary infrastructure for a robust
adult, and potentially juvenile monitoring program to address many key
questions of abundance and productivity, as well as spatial structure
and diversity.

WDFW regional biologists have updated the methodology used to generate
steelhead spawner abundance estimates for the Touchet River. The updated
estimates are based on annual redd counts in the mainstem above the town
of Dayton and include an adjustment to include spawners in two
tributaries entering below that reach (Coppei and Waits Creeks). Age
composition and hatchery/natural proportions for spawning in the reach
above the Dayton are based on sampling at a mainstem weir at Dayton.
Hatchery spawner proportions are adjusted to account for differential
removals of hatchery fish at the weir and for the endemic broodstock
program (natural returns). 

*Resident Contributions to Anadromous Production*

Many steelhead (*O. mykiss*) populations along the West Coast co-occur
with conspecific populations of resident rainbow trout. Previous NWFSC
status reviews (e.g. Ford *et al*. 2011, NWFSC 2015) have recognized
that there may be situations where reproductive contributions from
resident rainbow trout could mitigate short-term extinction risk for
some steelhead DPS populations (Good *et al*. 2005; 70 FR 67130). In
general, we assume that any benefits to an anadromous population
resulting from the presence of a conspecific resident form will be
reflected in direct measures of the current viability of the anadromous
form. Potential contribution rates of co-occurring resident production
to anadromous returns vary considerably among populations as a function
of habitat and survival patterns (Satterthwaite *et al.* 2010). In the
Middle Columbia DPS, a study in the Deschutes River Basin found no
evidence of a significant contribution from the very abundant resident
form to anadromous returns (Zimmerman & Reeves 2000). A recent study of
natural origin steelhead kelts in the Yakima Basin, comparing isotope
patterns in otoliths with water chemistry sampling, found evidence for
variable maternal resident contribution rates to andromous returns, with
a high degree of variation among natal areas and across years (Courter
*et al.* 2013). The Satus River had the lowest sampled proportions of
maternal resident patterns (\<8% of samples in 2011 and 2012). The
highest proportions were for fish that were assigned to the Lower Yakima
basin (38% and 17%). Toppenish Creek and Naches River were intermediate.
The authors note that the ability to discriminate among natal rearing
areas in the study could be improved by expanding the number of
geochemical markers in the regional water sampling and otolith analyses.
Despite the documented contribution of resident *O. mykiss* to the
anadromous populations across the Middle Columbia River DPS, there is no
evidence that these contributions alone could fully support sufficient
productivity to make the populations viable.

*Population, MPG and DPS Structure*

The increasing use of PIT tags applied to representative samples from
steelhead populations (both natural production and hatchery releases)
has identified relatively high loss rates of returning adults from
specific populations, either as mortalities or as strays into non-natal
basins. In 2013, 1325 PIT tagged fish produced in the John Day River
basin were detected passing above Bonneville Dam and 13% of those tagged
fish directly migrated into the John Day River based on detections at
Lower John Day mainstem arrays. A relatively high proportion (71%) of
the adults detected at Bonneville Dam continued upriver past the John
Day and were next detected at McNary Dam. After overwintering, 616 of
those fish dropped back and entered the John Day River. Accounting for
both the direct and delayed entries, approximately 57% of the returns
detected at Bonneville eventually entered the natal basin. Recent rates
of John Day River adult "overshoot" are similar, 2018 (44/68 or 65%),
2019 (70/113 or 62%) and 2020 (42/72 or 58%). High rates of overshooting
were also indicated for some other Mid-Columbia steelhead populations. A
proportion of the returning adults tagged as juveniles in the Yakima
River Basin initially migrated upstream into the Upper Columbia River,
although a relatively high proportion did eventually fall back to be
detected entering the Yakima River (Richins & Skalski 2018).

Genetic analyses of juvenile *O. mykiss* sampled in the Rock Creek
drainage indicate a relatively high similarity to Snake River DPS,
suggesting relatively high stray rates from that region into Rock Creek
(Matala 2012). Sampling adult spawners in Rock Creek, including
conducting PBT based analysis of any hatchery fish, would clarify the
current stock viability. Matala (2012) also suggests that analysis of
archival samples would provide insights into whether historical genetic
patterns for this and other Mid-Columbia DPS populations also reflect
high exchange rates with Snake River DPS, or whether the current
patterns are a relatively recent change. 

*John Day River Studies*

ODFW sampling programs in the John Day River basin continue to provide
information on adult spawner abundance, juvenile productivity and
genetic structure (Banks *et al.* 2013; Banks *et al.* 2014b; Bare *et
al.* 2015). Spawner abundance estimates generated or extrapolated from
spatially balanced sampling in the basin are included in the updated
abundance and productivity assessments described above. 

Estimates of outmigrant smolt production based on smolt trapping are
available for a limited number of years for the Middle Fork and South
Fork populations. The patterns in production vs. parent redd counts are
consistent with density dependent relationships, although more data
pairs for each series will be necessary to derive specific functional
relationships. 

Proportions of out of basin hatchery steelhead in John Day natural
spawning areas have declined substantially in recent years, with the
declines being negatively correlated with the proportion of Snake River
outmigrants that are barge transported (Banks *et al.* 2013; Bare *et
al.* 2015). As in prior years, hatchery origin spawners were
concentrated in the Lower John Day population tributaries. 

Genetic sampling data from specific reaches in the John Day basin showed
some differentiation, but did not directly correspond to the population
structure inferred from geographic separation and dispersal rate
assumptions hypothesized by the ICTRT (2003). In most cases there was
temporal correlation among samples taken from the same sites over years,
but differences among sites were not significant. Exceptions to this
general pattern included Indian, Belshaw and Reynolds Creeks. Indian
Creek is a reach above a series of cascades and may be dominated by
local resident trout production. There is evidence of
cutthroat/steelhead hybridization in Belshaw and Reynolds Creeks that
could be contributing to their relative genetic distinctiveness. 

*Fifteen Mile Creek Life History patterns*

Fifteen Mile Creek is one of two extant natural-origin populations at
the western edge of the Middle Columbia River Steelhead DPS. Steelhead
runs in the downstream neighboring DPS (Lower Columbia River) are
generally winter run. ODFW had classified the Fifteen Mile Creek
population as winter run prior to recent PIT tag studies. Returning
natural origin steelhead PIT tagged as juveniles in the mainstem Fifteen
Mile Creek watershed exhibit a summer timed return pattern, similar to
other populations in the middle Columbia River DPS (Poxon *et al.*
2014). The Fifteen Mile Creek population includes some smaller
tributaries downstream of the Fifteen Mile Creek drainage. It is
possible a component of natural production associated with those small
streams is winter run. ODFW has observed that genetic analyses might
resolve the potential existence of a winter run component. 

*Smolt to adult return and recruit per spawner rates*

Smolt to adult return survival estimates (SARs) and recruits per spawner
(R/S) are available through StreamNet's Coordinated Assessments data
portal (StreamNet, 2020a) and Columbia River Data Access in Real Time
(CBR & Washington 2020) project using PIT tag detections from all
release locations within each population basin (Columbia River DART *et
al.* 2020). The metrics are based on mainstem hydrosystem tag
detections, most commonly Bonneville to Bonneville for Mid and Upper
Columbia popualtions. The indices represent cumulative marine, nearshore
and estuary survival (SAR, expressed as a percent of the smolts
returning as adults) and whole life-cycle survival (R/S, expressed as a
ratio of adults returning relative to their parents as spawners). SAR
and R/S metrics are available for Fifteenmile, Umatilla and the
aggregate of the five John Day River populations. In general, these
broad-brush survival metrics indicate relatively robust population
processes for the select stocks, though the low R/S value for the
Umatilla and the low SAR value for Fifteenmile could be indicative of
ecological limitations to population productivity, e.g., an SAR of 2% is
accepted as the minimum rate for a population to be replacing itself.

*Ocean Condition Indices*

Juvenile steelhead are more pelagic than salmon, heading off the
continental shelf soon after entering the ocean in the spring (Burgner
et al. 1992). Steelhead migrate seasonally across the North Pacific
Ocean, moving to the north and west in spring and to the south and east,
across the entire Pacific, from autumn through winter (Atcheson et al.
2012). Thus, steelhead ocean survival may be impacted by different
factors than salmon. In fact, recent work has shown steelhead population
groupings from geographic regions have unique smolt survival trends that
appear to be driven by factors affecting them early in their ocean
residence despite steelhead smolts generally being larger than Pacific
salmon smolts when they enter the ocean and all making wide-ranging, off
the continental shelf migrations, rather than remaining more coastal, as
Pacific salmon smolts tend to do (Kendal et al. 2017).

Aggregate annual returns of Columbia River Spring Chinook are correlated
with a range of ocean condition indices including measures of broad
scale physical conditions, local biological indicators, and local
physical factors (Peterson *et al.* 2014a). Work is ongoing to relate
indices of ocean condition to steelhead populations up and down the West
Coast. Steelhead marine survival seems to be related to ocean surface
temperature in the first summer of ocean entry, and populations respond
similarly to spatial patterns of ocean conditions at a rough grain of
250km between ocean entry points (Kendal et al. 2017). Therefore, broad
spatial patterns of ocean conditions may not capture the finer spatial
scale of response that steelhead seem to exhibit.

Indicators of ocean condition are highly correlated with each other, and
exhibit strong temporal autocorrelation (Figure 129, (Peterson *et al.*
2019)). As a result, when indicators point to conditions that result in
poor ocean productivity for salmonid populations, they do so as a suite
of indicators, and for runs of 'good' or 'bad' years (see Habitat
chapter). Historically, ocean conditions cycled between periods of high
and low productivity. However, global climate change is likely to
disrupt this pattern, in general, leading to a preponderance of low
productivity years, with an unknown temporal distribution (Crozier *et
al.* 2019b). Recent (2015-2019) ensemble ocean indicators rankings
include four of the worst seven years in the past 20, meaning that an
entire salmon or steelhead generation could have been subjected to poor
ocean productivity conditions.

### Abundance and productivity

Evaluations were done using both a set of metrics corresponding to those
used in prior viability reviews as well as a set corresponding to the
specific viability criteria based on ICTRT recommendations for this ESU.
The viability review level metrics were consistently done across all
ESUs and DPSs to facilitate comparisons across domains. Assessments
using the ICTRT metrics are described in the Recovery evaluation section
below.

Total escapement and natural-origin escapements declined relative to the
prior five year review for all five of the John Day populations (Table
24). Only two out of the five populations in this group had a positive
15 year trend in natural origin abundance (Table 25) driven largely by
peak returns in the early 2000's despite the strong declines over the
most recent five year period (Figure 46).

Five year geometric mean natural origin and total abundance estimates
for each of the four populations in the Yakima River MPG also decreased
sharply relative to the prior review (Table 24). All four populations in
this group have exhibited increases since the early 1990s, with similar
peak return years as other DPS populations, but given recent declines,
the 15 year trend for all populations was essentially zero (Figure 46,
Table 24). 

Total spawning escapements have decreased in the most recent brood cycle
for all three populations in the Umatilla-Walla Walla MPG as well (Table
24). The 15 year trend in natural origin abundance was positive for the
Umatilla River population and slightly negative for the Touchet River
(Table 25, Figure 46), though the trends are shallow.

Abundance data series are available for five of the five extant
populations in the East Cascades. Spawner abundance estimates for the
most recent five years decreased relative to the prior review for all
five populations (Table 24). The 15 year trend in natural origin
spawners was strongly negative for the East Side Deschutes population,
and essentially zero for the Fifteen Mile and West Side Deschutes runs
(Table 25). Preliminary estimates of escapements into Rock Creek were
recently developed, and a high proportion of the observed steelhead in
that system were out of basin strays (Harvey 2014). 

Using the R/S and SAR indicators by population, it is possible to
generate an indicator of fresh water productivity (FWPI) as a ratio of
R/S and SAR (Figure 55). This quantity can be thought of as an indicator
of smolts per spawner, and thus, the overall population productivity in
the freshwater environment. Brood year return rates reflect the combined
impacts of year to year patterns in marine life history stages, upstream
and downstream passage survivals as well as density dependent effects
resulting from capacity or survival limitations on tributary spawning or
juvenile rearing habitats. FWPI for the Mid Columbia steelhead
populations for which this indicator can be constructed indicate
relatively moderate fresh water productivity, with the majority of the
populations below 100, a conservative estimate of 100 smolts per spawner
(Figure 48). The relatively high SAR estimates for the aggregate run to
the John Day River, and moderate R/S rates, result in low estimates of
freshwater productivity. Low freshwater productivity does point to areas
of recovery action focus such as pre-spawn mortality and juvenile
rearing habitat condition, as well as mainstem migratory impacts as the
SAR are based on Bonneville to Bonneville tag detections, and the R/S
are based on spawning ground recruits. The initial assessment of
abundance and productivity gaps for the Mid-Columbia steelhead
populations indicated a diversity of conditions, but generally smaller
than those for the other Interior Columbia Basin listed DPSs (ICTRT
2007). Nonetheless, long term productivity metrics, where produced,
indicate the potential for needed improvements to reduce demographic
risk factors.

![](./media/media/image60.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="6.519607392825897in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

![](./media/media/image62.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="6.519607392825897in"}

Figure . Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of the
smoothed natural spawning abundance in year *t* - smoothed natural
spawning abundance in year (*t* -- 4). Spawning years on x axis.

![](./media/media/image63.png){width="6.5in"
height="3.3694444444444445in"}

Figure . Smolt to Adult Return, Recruits per Spawner, and Freshwater
Productivity Index (FWPI) for each of the populations in the ESU.
Geometric means of SAR and R/S are shown for each population, along with
the standard error of the estimate (whiskers represent +/- one standard
error). The time period included in the SAR or R/S indices is the past
20 years, depending on data availability. The FWPI is constructed as a
ratio of the geomean R/S and SAR, and can be thought of as a measure of
smolts per spawner.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population    MPG              1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                         Change
  ------------- ---------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Klickitat R.  Cascades E.                                          1622 (1622) 1358 (1358) 1573 (1573) 16 (16)
                Slope Tribs.                                                                             

  Fifteenmile   Cascades E.      \(405\)     \(396\)     \(941\)     \(264\)     430 (497)   278 (289)   -35
  Ck.           Slope Tribs.                                                                             (-42)

  Deschutes     Cascades E.      249 (324)   226 (341)   742 (951)   478 (579)   731 (781)   415 (432)   -43
  R. - Westside Slope Tribs.                                                                             (-45)

  Deschutes     Cascades E.      618 (773)   693 (1440)  3823 (4849) 1419 (1712) 963 (1123)  292 (340)   -70
  R. - Eastside Slope Tribs.                                                                             (-70)

  Rock Ck.      Cascades E.                                          113 (113)   396 (396)   266 (266)   -33
                Slope Tribs.                                                                             (-33)

  John Day R.   John Day         1021 (1248) 968 (1017)  3479 (4052) 1024 (1382) 2017 (2300) 1006 (1038) -50
  Low. Mainstem                                                                                          (-55)
  Tribs.                                                                                                 

  NF John Day   John Day         1248 (793)  1142 (1200) 2247 (2514) 1488 (1618) 2822 (2879) 910 (914)   -68
  R.                                                                                                     (-68)

  MF John Day   John Day         1306 (1225) 545 (572)   1229 (1375) 634 (689)   4767 (4864) 2388 (2397) -50
  R.                                                                                                     (-51)

  SF John Day   John Day         450 (402)   135 (142)   493 (551)   586 (637)   1148 (1171) 776 (779)   -32
  R.                                                                                                     (-33)

  John Day R.   John Day         991 (1029)  350 (368)   695 (777)   471 (512)   1086 (1108) 458 (460)   -58
  Up. Mainstem                                                                                           (-58)

  Satus Ck.     Yakima           339 (377)   266 (300)   641 (652)   806 (829)   1575 (1608) 650 (656)   -59
                                                                                                         (-59)

  Toppenish     Yakima           102 (113)   135 (153)   695 (706)   467 (481)   570 (583)   232 (235)   -59
                                                                                                         (-60)

  Naches R.     Yakima           281 (313)   260 (294)   854 (868)   823 (846)   1879 (1923) 913 (921)   -51
                                                                                                         (-52)

  Yakima R. Up. Yakima           54 (56)     49 (50)     145 (149)   155 (157)   389 (410)   329 (337)   -15
  Mainstem                                                                                               (-18)

  Umatilla R.   Walla            1070 (1346) 925 (1664)  2355 (3324) 1946 (2517) 3101 (3687) 2451 (2877) -21
                Walla/Umatilla                                                                           (-22)

  Walla Walla   Walla            995 (995)   516 (522)   957 (997)   711 (733)   1016 (1035) 500 (583)   -51
  R.            Walla/Umatilla                                                                           (-44)

  Touchet R.    Walla            392 (438)   343 (396)   357 (388)   337 (446)   397 (501)   162 (214)   -59
                Walla/Umatilla                                                                           (-57)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year geometric mean of raw wild spawner counts. This is
  the raw total spawner count times the fraction wild estimate, if
  available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total spawner
  counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that a total
  spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of wild
  spawners available. The geometric mean was computed as the product of
  counts raised to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to
  5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean.
  Percent change between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on
  the far right.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                MPG               1990-2005     2004-2019
  ------------------------- ----------------- ------------- --------------
  Klickitat R.              Cascades E. Slope               0 (-0.04,
                            Tribs.                          0.03)

  Fifteenmile Ck.           Cascades E. Slope 0.06 (0.01,   -0.03 (-0.07,
                            Tribs.            0.1)          0.01)

  Deschutes R. - Westside   Cascades E. Slope 0.08 (0.03,   -0.04 (-0.09,
                            Tribs.            0.13)         0)

  Deschutes R. - Eastside   Cascades E. Slope 0.1 (0.05,    -0.15 (-0.19,
                            Tribs.            0.15)         -0.11)

  Rock Ck.                  Cascades E. Slope               
                            Tribs.                          

  John Day R. Low. Mainstem John Day          0.05 (0, 0.1) -0.03 (-0.08,
  Tribs.                                                    0.02)

  NF John Day R.            John Day          0.08 (0.04,   -0.04 (-0.1,
                                              0.12)         0.01)

  MF John Day R.            John Day          0.01 (-0.03,  0.09 (0.02,
                                              0.06)         0.15)

  SF John Day R.            John Day          0.04 (-0.02,  0.04 (-0.01,
                                              0.09)         0.09)

  John Day R. Up. Mainstem  John Day          -0.01 (-0.06, -0.01 (-0.07,
                                              0.04)         0.04)

  Satus Ck.                 Yakima            0.07 (0.02,   -0.01 (-0.07,
                                              0.11)         0.04)

  Toppenish                 Yakima            0.14 (0.09,   -0.05 (-0.1,
                                              0.19)         -0.01)

  Naches R.                 Yakima            0.09 (0.05,   0.01 (-0.04,
                                              0.14)         0.06)

  Yakima R. Up. Mainstem    Yakima            0.09 (0.05,   0.06 (0.01,
                                              0.14)         0.11)

  Umatilla R.               Walla             0.07 (0.03,   0 (-0.05,
                            Walla/Umatilla    0.11)         0.04)

  Walla Walla R.            Walla             0 (-0.04,     -0.03 (-0.08,
                            Walla/Umatilla    0.05)         0.01)

  Touchet R.                Walla             0.02 (-0.01,  -0.06 (-0.1,
                            Walla/Umatilla    0.06)         -0.01)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log natural spawner abundance computed
  from a linear regression applied to the smoothed natural spawner log
  abundance estimate. Only populations with at least 4 natural spawner
  estimates from 1980 to 2014 are shown and with at least 2 data points
  in the first 5 years and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

### non-treaty Harvest

Steelhead were historically taken in tribal and non-tribal gillnet
fisheries, and in recreational fisheries in the mainstem Columbia River
and in tributaries. In the 1970s, retention of steelhead in non-tribal
commercial fisheries was prohibited, and in the mid 1980s, tributary
recreational fisheries in Washington adopted mark-selective regulations.
Steelhead are still harvested in tribal fisheries, in mainstem
recreational fisheries, and there is incidental mortality associated
with mark-selective recreational fisheries. The majority of impacts on
the summer run occur in tribal gillnet and dip net fisheries targeting
Chinook salmon. Sport fisheries targeting hatchery run steelhead occur
in the mainstem Columbia River and in several Mid-Columbia River
tributaries (Figure 49 lower panel).

Few winter-run fish migrate above Bonneville Dam and winter-run
steelhead are in the mainstem river at a time when there is generally
little or no fishing occurring. The Klickitat River Steelhead population
within the Mid-Columbia Steelhead DPS has a winter run component,
although anadromous production is dominated by summer run timing. The
ICTRT classified Fifteen Mile Creek, another Mid-Columbia DPS population
located in the downstream extent of the DPS, as winter run although
recent information summarized in this assessment indicates that its core
production area exhibits summer run timing. Recreational fisheries in
Washington tributaries have been mark selective since the mid-1980s.
Because very few of the fish ascend above Bonneville Dam, there was
little focus on this run prior to listing. Total non-treaty fishery
impact rates for the natural component are in the range of 0.5% (Figure
57 upper panel).

Figure . Non-treatyharvest impacts on natural winter (upper panel) and
summer (lower panel) steelhead from the Mid-Columbia Steelhead DPS. As
of 2012, harvest management reporting is broken into two periods, Fall
and Winter/Spring/Summer, where previously reporting was done by full
calendar year. (TAC 2020)

### Spatial structure and diversity

Updated information on spawner and juvenile rearing distribution does
not support a change in spatial structure status for Mid-Columbia
Steelhead DPS populations, though the newly re-established run in the
White Salmon and the developing timeseries of population data from the
Klickitat and Rock Creek do warrant consideration in the DPS Recovery
Plan. Viability indicators for within population diversity have changed
for some populations, although in most cases the changes have not been
sufficient to shift composite risk ratings for a particular population. 

In the Cascades Eastern Slope MPG, Fifteen Mile Creek remains rated at
low risk for spatial structure and diversity. Spawning distributions
mimic inferred historical patterns, life history diversity and
phenotypic characteristics are believed to be intact and adult sampling
indicates low contributions from straying out of basin hatchery stocks.
Additional information obtained from spawner distribution and genetic
sampling in the Klickitat River support the low risk rating for spatial
structure and suggest that the current moderate rating for within
population diversity may improve as additional years data accumulate.
The current diversity risk rating of moderate was largely based on
uncertainty about effects of the ongoing hatchery program in the basin.
Initial results indicate that the separation in time and space between
hatchery origin and wild spawners has been effective in minimizing
introgression. Indices for both spatial structure and diversity risk for
the Westside Deschutes population remain at moderate risk. The spatial
structure rating is due to the loss of natural production from above
Pelton/Round Butte. The Eastside Deschutes population is rated at low
risk for spatial structure. Both populations are rated at moderate risk
for diversity based on reductions in life history diversity as a result
of habitat degradation and potential genetic impacts resulting from
chronic and widespread hatchery straying from out of basin stocks. The
most recent five year average proportion wild for spawners in the
Westside population continues to increase (Table 26). Specific
information on spawner distribution and composition for the other extant
population in this MPG, Rock Creek, has become available since the prior
review. Spawning in this historically small population appears to be
dominated by out of basin natural origin strays.

The most recent results from spawner surveys and juvenile sampling are
consistent with the moderate risk rating assigned to Umatilla/Walla
Walla MPG populations in prior reviews, reflecting the contracted range
and the existence of gaps among spawning areas within each population.
Diversity risk remains at moderate, with no new information indicating
increased life history or phenotypic diversity. Prior reviews have also
identified concerns regarding the proportions of out of basin hatchery
fish contributing to spawning in all three populations, with the highest
proportions being observed in the Umatilla and Touchet Rivers. Total
hatchery proportions have increased slightly from the prior review.

The spatial structure for all five populations in the John Day River MPG
remains rated at low or very low risk based on recent updated spawner
distributions. Habitat conditions believed to limit life history and
phenotypic diversity remain relatively unchanged. Hatchery proportions
estimated for John Day River populations have declined considerably in
recent years (Figure 50).

Three of the four populations in the Yakima MPG remain at low risk for
spatial structure impacts based on results from recent radio tag and pit
tag studies. Distribution across spawning areas within the fourth
population, the Upper Yakima River, continues to be substantially
reduced from inferred historical levels and is rated at moderate. As
with the populations in the Umatilla/Walla Walla MPG, risks due to the
loss of life history and phenotypic diversity inferred from habitat
degradation (including passage impacts within the Yakima Basin) remain
at prior levels. There are no within basin hatchery steelhead releases
in the Yakima and outside source strays remain at low levels. 

![](./media/media/image65.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="6.519607392825897in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in the estimated fraction of the natural
spawning population consisting of fish if natural origin. Points show
the annual raw estimates. 

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population              1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ----------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Klickitat R.                                    1.00        1.00        1.00

  Fifteenmile Ck.                                             0.96        0.96

  Deschutes R. - Westside 0.67        0.78        0.83        0.94        0.96

  Deschutes R. - Eastside 0.51        0.79        0.84        0.86        0.86

  Rock Ck.                                        1.00        1.00        1.00

  John Day R. Low.        0.95        0.86        0.74        0.88        0.97
  Mainstem Tribs.                                                         

  NF John Day R.          0.95        0.89        0.92        0.98        1.00

  MF John Day R.          0.95        0.89        0.92        0.98        1.00

  SF John Day R.          0.95        0.89        0.92        0.98        1.00

  John Day R. Up.         0.95        0.89        0.92        0.98        1.00
  Mainstem                                                                

  Satus Ck.               0.89        0.98        0.97        0.98        1.00

  Toppenish               0.88        0.98        0.97        0.98        0.99

  Naches R.               0.89        0.98        0.97        0.98        1.00

  Yakima R. Up. Mainstem  0.98        0.97        0.99        0.95        0.99

  Umatilla R.             0.56        0.71        0.77        0.84        0.85

  Walla Walla R.          0.99        0.96        0.97        0.98        0.87

  Touchet R.              0.87        0.92        0.76        0.79        0.76
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year mean of fraction wild Lower Columbia River coho
  salmon spawners (sum of all estimates divided by the number of
  estimates). Blanks (-) mean no estimate available in that 5-year
  range.

### Biological viability relative to recovery goals

Recovery strategies outlined in the Recovery Plan and its management
unit components are targeted on achieving, at a minimum, the ICTRT
biological viability criteria requiring that the DPS should "\... have
all four major population groups at viable (low risk) status with
representation of all the major life history strategies present
historically, and with the abundance, productivity spatial structure,
and diversity attributes required for long-term persistence." The
Recovery Plan recognizes that, at the major population group level,
there may be several specific combinations of population viability
ratings that could satisfy the ICTRT criteria. Each of the management
unit plans identifies particular combinations that are the most likely
to result in achieving viable major population group status. The
recovery plan recognizes that the management unit plans incorporate a
range of objectives that go beyond the minimum biological viability
required for delisting.

The ICTRT recovery criteria are hierarchical in nature, with ESU/DPS
level criteria being based on the viability of natural-origin steelhead
assessed at the population level (ICTRT 2007).

Under the ICTRT approach, population level assessments are based on a
set of metrics designed to evaluate risk across the four viable salmonid
population elements: A/P, spatial structure, and diversity (McElhany *et
al.* 2000). The ICTRT approach calls for comparing estimates of current
natural-origin abundance (measured as a 10-year geometric mean of
natural-origin spawners) and productivity (estimate of recruit per
spawner at low to moderate parent spawning abundance) against predefined
viability curves. In addition, the ICTRT developed a set of specific
criteria (metrics and example risk thresholds) for assessing the spatial
structure and diversity risks based on current information representing
each specific population. The ICTRT viability criteria are generally
expressed relative to the particular risk threshold of a 5% risk of
extinction over a 100-year period.

The Mid-Columbia Recovery Plan identifies a set of most likely scenarios
to meet the ICTRT recommendations for low risk populations at the MPG
level. In addition, the management unit plans generally call for
achieving moderate risk ratings (maintained status) across the remaining
extant populations in each MPG.

[John Day River MPG]{.underline}: The lower mainstem John Day River,
North Fork John Day River and either the Middle Fork John Day River or
upper mainstem John Day River populations should achieve at least viable
status. The management unit plan also calls for at least one population
to be highly viable, consistent with ICTRT recommendations. 

[Yakima River MPG]{.underline}: To achieve viable status, two
populations should be rated as viable, including at least one of the two
classified as large---the Naches River and the upper Yakima River. The
remaining two populations should, at a minimum meet the maintained
criteria. The management unit plan also calls for at least one
population to be highly viable, consistent with ICTRT recommendations.

[Umatilla/Walla-Walla MPG]{.underline}: Two populations should meet
viability criteria. The management unit plan also calls for at least one
population to be highly viable, consistent with ICTRT recommendations.
The Umatilla River is the only large population, and therefore needs to
be viable. In addition either the Walla Walla River or Touchet River
also needs to be viable.

[Cascades Eastern Slope MPG]{.underline}: The Klickitat, Fifteen Mile,
and both the Deschutes Eastside and Westside populations should reach at
least viable status.to meet MPG level viability objectives. The
management unit plans also call for at least one population to be highly
viable, consistent with ICTRT recommendations. The Rock Creek population
should reach maintained status (25% or less risk level). MPG viability
could be further bolstered if reintroduction of steelhead into the
Crooked River succeeds and if the White Salmon population successfully
recolonizes its historical habitat following the upcoming removal of
Condit Dam. The ICTRT originally classified the Fifteen Mile Creek
population as winter run. Based on the recent information provided by
ODFW described above, that designation should be provisionally changed
to summer run. 

Overall viability ratings for the populations in the Mid-Columbia
Steelhead DPS remained generally unchanged from the prior five year
review (Table 27).

<table style="width:100%;">
<caption><p>Table . Current five-year geometric mean of raw
natural-origin spawner abundances and recovery targets (Dornbush and
Sihler 2013) for Lower Columbia River coho salmon demographically
independent populations (DIPs).  Numbers in () represent total (hatchery
+ origin) spawners.  Colors indicate the relative proportion of the
recovery target currently obtained: red (&lt;10%), orange
(10%&gt;x&lt;50%), yellow (50%&gt;x&lt;100%), green
(&gt;100%).</p></caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 11%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 11%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 9%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 11%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th rowspan="2">Population</th>
<th colspan="4"><strong>Abundance and Productivity Metrics</strong></th>
<th colspan="4"><strong>Spatial Structure and Diversity
Metrics</strong></th>
<th><strong>Overall Viability Rating</strong></th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th><em><strong>ICTRT Minimum Threshold</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Natural Spawning Abundance</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>ICTRT Productivity</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Integrated A/P Risk</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Natural Processes Risk</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Diversity Risk</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Integrated SS/D Risk</strong></em></th>
<th colspan="2"></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td colspan="10"><strong>Eastern Cascades MPG</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Fifteen Mile Creek</td>
<td>500</td>
<td><p>378</p>
<p>(sd. 170)</p></td>
<td><p>2.12</p>
<p>(0.19 8/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Very Low</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Deschutes (Westside)</td>
<td>1,500 (1,000)</td>
<td><p>538</p>
<p>(sd. 306)</p></td>
<td><p>1.10</p>
<p>(0.15 18/20)</p></td>
<td>High</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">High Risk</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Deschutes (Eastside)</td>
<td>1,000</td>
<td><p>604</p>
<p>(sd. 453)</p></td>
<td><p>1.75</p>
<p>(0.29 7/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Klickitat River</td>
<td>1,000</td>
<td><p>1462</p>
<p>(sd. 919)</p></td>
<td><p>1.07</p>
<p>(0.12 8/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Rock Creek</td>
<td>500</td>
<td><p>298</p>
<p>(sd. 232)</p></td>
<td></td>
<td>High</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">High Risk</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em>Crooked River (ext)</em></td>
<td><em>2,000</em></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"><em>Extirpated</em></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><em>White Salmon R. (ext)</em></td>
<td><em>500</em></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2"><p><em>Extirpated</em></p>
<p><em>(recolonizing)</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td colspan="10"><strong>Yakima River MPG</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Satus Creek</td>
<td>1,000 (500)</td>
<td><p>1064</p>
<p>(sd. 777)</p></td>
<td><p>1.92</p>
<p>(0.30 3/20)</p></td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Viable</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Toppenish Creek</td>
<td>500</td>
<td><p>407</p>
<p>(sd. 231)</p></td>
<td><p>3.35</p>
<p>(0.23 9/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Naches River</td>
<td>1,500</td>
<td><p>1,340</p>
<p>(sd. 601)</p></td>
<td><p>2.00</p>
<p>(0.23 6/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Upper Yakima River</td>
<td>1,500</td>
<td><p>346</p>
<p>(sd. 129)</p></td>
<td><p>1.73</p>
<p>(0.15 20/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>High</td>
<td>High</td>
<td colspan="2">High Risk</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td colspan="10"><strong>John Day River MPG</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Lower John Day</td>
<td>2,250</td>
<td><p>1,424</p>
<p>(sd. 1026)</p></td>
<td><p>2.72</p>
<p>(0.19 12/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Very Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Middle Fork John Day</td>
<td>1,000</td>
<td><p>3371</p>
<p>(sd. 1811)</p></td>
<td><p>4.49</p>
<p>(0.27 8/20)</p></td>
<td>Very Low</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Viable</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>North Fork John Day</td>
<td>1,000</td>
<td><p>1,852</p>
<p>(sd. 1343)</p></td>
<td><p>3.31</p>
<p>(0.16 2/20)</p></td>
<td>Very Low</td>
<td>Very Low</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td colspan="2">Highly Viable</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>South Fork John Day</td>
<td>500</td>
<td><p>943</p>
<p>(sd. 552)</p></td>
<td><p>2.45</p>
<p>(0.29 10/20)</p></td>
<td>Very-Low</td>
<td>Very Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Viable</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Upper John Day</td>
<td>1,000</td>
<td><p>738</p>
<p>(sd. 418)</p></td>
<td><p>1.56</p>
<p>(0.16 14/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Very Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td colspan="10"><strong>Umatilla/Walla Walla MPG</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Umatilla River</td>
<td>1,500</td>
<td><p>2,747</p>
<p>(sd. 1108)</p></td>
<td><p>0.98</p>
<p>(0.27 6/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Walla Walla River</td>
<td>1,000</td>
<td><p>713</p>
<p>(sd. 511)</p></td>
<td><p>1.79</p>
<p>(0.18 8/20)</p></td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">Maintained</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Touchet River</td>
<td>1,000</td>
<td><p>253</p>
<p>(sd. 222)</p></td>
<td><p>0.91</p>
<p>(0.09 19/20)</p></td>
<td>High</td>
<td>Low</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td colspan="2">High Risk</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

: Table . Current five-year geometric mean of raw natural-origin spawner
abundances and recovery targets (Dornbush and Sihler 2013) for Lower
Columbia River coho salmon demographically independent populations
(DIPs).  Numbers in () represent total (hatchery + origin) spawners. 
Colors indicate the relative proportion of the recovery target currently
obtained: red (\<10%), orange (10%\>x\<50%), yellow (50%\>x\<100%),
green (\>100%).

### Updated biological risk summary

There has been functionally no change in the viability ratings for the
component populations, and the Mid-Columbia River Steelhead DPS does not
currently meet the viability criteria described in the Mid-Columbia
Steelhead Recovery Plan. In addition, several of the factors cited by
the 2005 BRT remain as concerns or key uncertainties. While recent (5yr)
returns are trending down across all populations, the declines are from
relatively high returns in the previous 5-10 year interval, so the
longer term risk metrics that are meant to buffer against short period
changes in abundance and productivity remain unchanged. Natural-origin
spawning estimates are highly variable relative to minimum abundance
thresholds across the populations in the DPS. Two of the four MPGs in
this DPS include at least one population rated at low/very low risk for
abundance and productivity, while the other two MPGs remain in the
moderate/high risk range (Table 27). Updated information indicates that
stray levels into the John Day River populations have decreased in
recent years. Out of basin hatchery stray proportions, although reduced,
remain high in spawning reaches within the Deschutes River basin and the
Walla Walla/Umatilla and Touchet populations. In general, the majority
of population level viability ratings remained unchanged from prior
reviews for each MPG within the DPS.

# Lower Columbia River domain viability summaries

## Lower Columbia River Chinook salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU

The ESU includes all naturally-produced populations of Chinook salmon
from the Columbia River and its tributaries from its mouth at the
Pacific Ocean upstream to a transitional point between Washington and
Oregon east of the Hood River and the White Salmon River, and includes
the Willamette River to Willamette Falls, Oregon (85 FR 81822, Figure
51), with the exception of spring-run Chinook salmon in the Clackamas
River.  The ESU spans three distinct ecological regions: Coastal,
Cascade, and Gorge.  Distinct life-histories (run and spawn timing)
within ecological regions in this ESU were identified as major
population groups (MPGs).  In total, 32 historical
demographically-independent populations were identified in this ESU, 9
spring-run, 21 fall-run, and 2 late-fall run, organized in 6 MPGs (based
on run timing and ecological region).

![](./media/media/image66.tiff){width="5.057638888888889in"
height="3.9094028871391076in"}
![](./media/media/image67.tiff){width="5.057971347331583in"
height="3.909659886264217in"}

Figure . Maps of the Lower Columbia River Chinook salmon ESU's spawning
and rearing areas, illustrating basins where demographically independent
populations (DIPs) and major population groups (MPGs) are located. 
Several watersheds contain or historically contained both spring-run
DIPs (top map) and fall and late-fall DIPs (bottom map). Areas that are
accessible (green), accessible only via trap and haul programs (yellow),
or blocked (cross-hatched) are indicated accordingly.

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2005*

In the 2005 update, a majority of the BRT votes for the Lower Columbia
River Chinook salmon ESU fell in the "likely to become endangered"
category, with minorities falling in the "in danger of extinction" and
"not likely to become endangered" categories (Good *et al*. 2005). The
BRT was still concerned about the risk factors identified in the
original 1998 review. The WLC-TRT estimated that 8 to 10 historical
populations in this ESU had been extirpated, the majority of them
spring-run populations. The near loss of that life history type remained
an important BRT concern. Although some natural production appeared to
occur in 20 or so populations, only one exceeded an average 1,000
spawners annually. High hatchery production continued to pose genetic
and ecological risks to natural populations and to mask their
performance. Most populations in this ESU had not experienced abundance
increases in the years leading up to the 2005 status review as had
occurred in other regions.*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) noted that three status evaluations of LCR Chinook
status, all based on WLC-TRT criteria, had been conducted since the last
BRT status update in 2005.  All three evaluations concluded that the ESU
was at very high risk of extinction. Of the 32 historical populations in
the ESU, 28 were considered extirpated or at very high risk. Based on
the recovery plan analyses, all of the tule (fall-run) populations were
considered at very high risk except one that was considered at high
risk. Later modeling conducted in association with tule harvest
management suggested that three of the populations (Coweeman, Lewis and
Washougal) were at a somewhat lower risk.  However, even these more
optimistic evaluations suggest that the remaining 18 populations were at
substantial risk because of very low natural origin spawner abundance
(\<100/population), high hatchery fraction, habitat degradation, and
harvest impacts. 

Ford *et al*. (2011) noted that spring Chinook populations remained
cut-off from access to essential (historical) spawning habitat by dams.
Trap and haul projects to allow access to historical spawning habitat
had been initiated in the Cowlitz and Lewis systems but in 2010 these
were not effective enough to produce self-sustaining populations,
primarily because of poor downstream juvenile collection. Dams were
removed on the Sandy River and Hood River; however, these dams impeded
passage rather than block it.  At the time of the review the benefits of
these actions were not yet expressed in adult returns.  The Sandy River
spring Chinook salmon population was considered at moderate risk and was
the only spring Chinook population not considered extirpated or nearly
so. The Hood River population contained an out-of-ESU hatchery stock.
The two late-fall populations, Lewis and Sandy, were the only
populations considered at low or very low risk. They contained
relatively few hatchery fish and as of 2010 had maintained high spawner
abundances (especially Lewis) since the last BRT evaluation in 2005.
Overall, the new information considered in 2010 did not indicate a
change in the biological risk category since the time of the last BRT
status review in 2005.

*2015*

The NWFSC (2015) analysis of the biological risk status of Lower
Columbia River Chinook salmon indicated little change since the prior
status review, although there were some positive trends.  Increases in
abundance were noted in about 70% of the fall-run populations and
decreases in hatchery contribution were noted for several populations. 
Relative to baseline VSP levels identified in the Recovery Plan
(Dornbush 2013) there had been an overall improvement in the status of a
number of fall-run populations, although most were still far from the
recovery plan goals.

In the 2015 review, improved fall-run VSP scores reflected both changes
in biological status and improved monitoring.  Spring-run Chinook
populations in this ESU were generally unchanged; most populations were
at high or very high risk due to low abundances and the high proportion
of hatchery-origin fish spawning naturally.  In contrast, the spring-run
Chinook salmon DIP in the Sandy River had an average of over a thousand
natural-origin spawners and was at moderate risk; this appeared partly
to be a result of the removal of Marmot Dam in the Sandy River that
eliminated migrational delays and holding injuries that were occurring
at the dam's fish ladder.  Further, the removal of a diversion dam on
the Little Sandy River restored access and flow to historical salmon
habitat.  Many of the spring-run populations rely upon passage programs
at high head dams and in most cases the downstream juvenile collection
efficiencies were still too low to maintain self-sustaining natural
runs.  While limited numbers of naturally-produced spring run fish
return to the Cowlitz and Cispus rivers, no spring-run fish were
transported into the Tilton River Basin and it was not clear if there
are any spring-run Chinook salmon remaining in the Toutle River Basin. 
The removal of Condit Dam on the White Salmon River provided an
opportunity for the reestablishment of a spring-run population with
volitional access to historical spawning grounds (abundance estimates
prior to 2012 reflected fish spawning [below]{.underline} Condit Dam
during the spring run temporal spawning window).  Alternatively,
spring-run Chinook salmon returning to the Hood River were largely the
result of introductions of Deschutes River spring-run origin (Middle
Columbia River Spring Run ESU) and provide no benefit to the status of
the ESU.  However, some Lower Columbia River origin spring-run Chinook
salmon had also been detected in the Hood River and may have contributed
to future native abundance in the river.

The majority of the populations in this ESU remained at high risk, with
low natural-origin abundance levels.  Hatchery contributions remained
high for a number of populations, and it is likely that many returning
unmarked adults were the progeny of hatchery-origin parents.  Where
large hatchery programs operated it is also likely that mismarked
hatchery-origin contributed to natural spawner counts.  While overall
hatchery production had been reduced slightly, hatchery-produced fish
still represented a majority of fish returning to the ESU.  The
continued release of out-of-ESU stocks, including URB, Rogue River (SAB)
fall run, Upper Willamette River spring run, Carson Hatchery spring run,
and Deschutes River spring run, remained a concern.  Relatively high
harvest rates were a potential concern, especially for most spring-run
and low abundance fall-run populations.  Although there had been a
number of notable efforts to restore migratory access to areas upstream
of dams, until efforts to improve juvenile passage systems bear
fruition, the review concluded that it was unlikely that there would be
significant improvements in the status of many spring-run populations. 
Alternatively, dam removals (i.e. Condit Dam, Marmot Dam, and Powerdale
Dam) not only improved/provided access, but allowed the restoration of
hydrological processes that may have improved downstream habitat
conditions.  Continued human population growth, land development, and
habitat degradation in combination with the potential effects of climate
change likely presented a continuous negative influence.  In addition,
coastal ocean conditions at the time of the 2015 review suggested that
the recent outmigrant year classes would experience below average ocean
survival with a corresponding drop in spawner abundance in the near
term, depending on the duration and intensity of the existing situation.

### Description of new data available for this review

For the current evaluation, data were available for many populations
through 2018 or 2019, with some of the data sets going back as far as
1968.  This status review benefits from expanded spawner surveys begun
after the 2010 review, especially in regard to abundance time series and
hatchery contribution to the naturally spawning adults.  Presently,
there is some level of monitoring for all Chinook salmon populations
except those that are functionally extinct (Rawding & Rodgers 2013). 
Guidance provided by Crawford and Rumsey (2011) emphasized the need for
a common set of population parameters that could be used to evaluate VSP
criteria across all populations.  In 2010 WDFW expanded their efforts to
survey chinook and coho salmon in the Lower Columbia River, specifically
focusing on data appropriate for evaluating VSP criteria (Rawding *et
al.* 2014).  These data include: abundance, proportion hatchery-origin
spawners, age and sex.  Similar efforts have been undertaken by ODFW to
more uniformly undertake spawner surveys across the Oregon coast and
lower Columbia River through their Oregon adult salmonid inventory &
sampling (OASIS) project.  A GRTS based spawning ground survey has been
conducted in the Coastal Strata by ODFW since 2012. Improvements in
spawner census methodologies have unfortunately resulted in the need to
"restart" some time series to ensure data compatibility.  Methodologies
include expansions of index reach redd counts, tributary weir counts,
mark/recapture surveys, and hatchery trap, dam trap, and dam ladder
counts.  Mass marking of hatchery-reared chinook salmon has become the
norm, providing better information on natural origin recruit (NOR)
abundance (instead of the previous method of CWT expansion), allowing
mark selective fisheries (reducing harvest impacts on natural origin
adults and reducing the number of hatchery-origin fish), and
facilitating broodstock protocols in hatcheries and natural-origin
spawner (NOS) selection at weirs and other facilities.  Data time series
are available for most populations although there is considerable
uncertainty in analyzing data time series across different survey
methodologies, especially those data series for years prior to 2010.

### Abundance and productivity

#### Spring-Run Cascade MPG

Of the seven spring-run DIPs in this MPG there are abundance estimates
for the Upper Cowlitz/Cispus (2 DIPs combined), Kalama, Lewis, and Sandy
populations.  Of these, only the Sandy River spring-run population
appears to be sustaining natural-origin abundance at near recovery
levels.  The most recent five-year geomean abundance for the Sandy River
was 3,359, which represents an 89% increase over 2010-2014 (Table 28). 
Removal of Marmot Dam in 2007 on the Sandy River, in conjunction with
efforts to reduce the contribution of hatchery-origin fish, has
facilitated the improved abundance of spring-run Chinook salmon in that
basin, an impressive result given the poor ocean conditions experienced
during this last review period.  All of the spring-run populations,
except the Sandy River, exhibited a recent uniform decline, possibly
related to climatic and oceanic conditions (Table 28, Figure 52). 
Elsewhere in this MPG natural-origin abundances for spring-run Chinook
salmon were very low and trends negative.  For the Upper Cowlitz/Cispus,
Kalama River, and Lewis River populations, hatchery returns currently
constitute the vast majority of fish returning to the river.  In the
Upper Cowlitz River, hatchery-origin fish are transported around the
dams, whereas in the Kalama and Lewis hatchery fish are intercepted at
Lower Kalama Falls and Merwin Dam, respectively.  Current programs on
the Cowlitz and Lewis rivers to pass returning adults above and collect
and transport migrating juveniles downstream around high head dams have
not attained sufficient efficiencies for the populations to sustain
themselves, although considerable progress has been made in recent years
(Rubenson *et al.* 2019; PacifiCorp 2020). Reintroduction efforts have
not yet begun to reestablish spring-run Chinook salmon in the Tilton
River DIP.  WDFW does not recognize the continued existence of the
Toutle River spring-run DIP, and adult spawner surveys are not
undertaken (WDF *et al.* 1993). The Kalama River spring-run hatchery
program is run as a segregated program and returning HOR adults are
excluded from upriver spawning habitat; however, the Kalama River
natural-origin spring-run abundance continues to be critically low, with
strongly negative long- and short-term trends (Table 28).  The spring
run in the North Fork Lewis River includes fish naturally-spawning below
Merwin Dam and fish returning to the Merwin Trap for transportation
above Swift Dam (the uppermost dam).  In summary, in this MPG only the
Sandy River spring-run Chinook salmon DIP has attained moderate
abundance levels, three have very low abundances, and the remaining
three have few if any naturally-spawning individuals, although the
populations may persist as hatchery stocks in some cases.

#### Spring-Run Gorge MPG

Both of the spring-run historical DIPs in this MPG are likely at
extremely low abundances (Table 28).  In the Big White Salmon River, the
removal of Condit Dam in 2011 reestablished access to historical
spring-run Chinook salmon spawning grounds.  Although some spring-run
fish have spawned in the basin subsequent to the dam removal, the origin
of those fish is not known and spawner surveys have been limited (LCFRB
(Lower Columbia Fish Recovery Board) 2020).  Native spring-run Chinook
salmon in the Hood River declined to critically low levels in the late
1980s and may have been completely supplanted by introduced Deschutes
River spring-run Chinook salmon, an out-of-ESU hatchery population. 
With the removal of Powerdale Dam, it has not been possible to estimate
the abundance of returning adults with any certainty.  Earlier reports
of unmarked spring-run Chinook salmon returning to the Hood River (NWFSC
2015), may suggest some the persistence of some native fish but there is
no verification of this.  The last estimate of natural abundance, 18
adults, was in 2017.  There is considerable uncertainty whether this MPG
persists, and whether the low abundances observed represent
natural-origin abundances of native origin.

#### Coastal Fall-Run MPG

In general, the DIPs in this MPG are dominated by hatchery-origin
spawners from one of the many large production hatcheries in the area
(Table 30).  The abundance of naturally-produced adults is low to very
low for all populations (Figure 52), with the confounding effects of the
first-generation progeny of naturally-spawning hatchery fish increasing
the uncertainty in any conclusions regarding productivity.  Only in the
Grays River DIP was there a considerable increase in five-year
abundance, from 79 to 228 (Table 28), although hatchery-origin fish
still constitute the majority of natural spawners (Table 30).  The
Elochoman River population was largely stable, with an five-year geomean
abundance of 95.  Of the remaining populations, downward trends were
observed in Youngs Bay, the Clatskanie River, and the
Mill/Abernathy/Germany Creek populations, all of which have low
abundances.  Spawning surveys for the Youngs Bay and Big Creek
populations are incomplete.  Big Creek surveys are not done every year,
and returns are dominated by returns to the hatchery.  Presently,
unmarked fall-run Chinook salmon are passed over the Big Creek weir to
spawn naturally in the upper basin, there is limited spawning habitat
below the weir, the most recent estimate for natural-origin spawners was
118 in 2018^4^.  The Clatskanie River surveys are strongly influenced by
large numbers of hatchery-origin fish being attracted to Plympton Creek,
whereas the mainstem Clatskanie River has a few natural-origin spawners
(\>10), but almost no hatchery-fish (Table 28).  In surveys conducted in
both 2012 and 2013 (the last on record), no Chinook salmon were observed
in Scappoose Creek.  Overall productivity estimates were negative,
except for the Grays River DIP (Figure 53).

#### Fall-Run Cascade MPG

The majority of the populations in this DIP have exhibited stable or
slightly positive natural origin abundance trends.  Six of the nine
populations exhibited positive short-term trends (Table 28).  Natural
origin spawner abundances were in the high hundreds to low thousands of
fish, with the majority of the fish on the spawning grounds being
natural origin, except for the Toutle, Kalama, and Washougal rivers
where hatchery programs strongly influence the composition of
naturally-spawning fish (Table 30).  The Lower Cowlitz River DIP had the
highest 5-year abundance, 3,208, a 25% increase over the previous period
(Table 28) and interestingly, the proportion of hatchery-origin spawners
in Lower Cowlitz River was relatively low, 29.0%, especially given the
large hatchery program present (Gleizes *et al.* 2014).  Annual
variability in the proportion of hatchery-origin spawners is very high
in the Clackamas River (Figure 58), although only a few years of data
are available.  Recent improvements in natural adult returns to the
Tilton River (part of the Upper Cowlitz River Fall Run DIP) suggest that
the trap and haul program at Mayfield Dam has been successful (Serl &
Morrill 2010; Rubenson *et al.* 2019).  Overall, most of the fall-run
populations in this MPG are improving, even approaching recovery levels
in some cases, and while the level of hatchery contribution to naturally
spawning adults is relatively better than in other MPGs in this ESU,
most populations are still far above the hatchery contribution target of
10% identified in the NMFS Lower Columbia River recovery plan (Dornbush
2013).

#### Fall-Run Gorge MPG

Many of the populations in this MPG have limited spawning habitat
available, either because of inundation of historical habitat in the
Upper Gorge or the loss of access.  Natural-origin returns for most
populations are in the hundreds of fish, with decreases in abundance
noted for those population for which we have abundance estimates (Figure
52).  The removal of Condit Dam in 2011 has restored access to spawning
habitat for both fall-run and spring-run Chinook salmon; fall-run (tule)
Chinook salmon appear to reestablishing themselves, while spring-run
recolonization has been very limited (LCFRB 2020).  Recent five-year
geomean for the Big White Salmon River was 282, a 63% decline in
abundance (Table 28).  Chinook salmon estimates on the Oregon side of
the Gorge MPG have been attempted in the Hood River; however, GRTS
criteria have not been met and population estimates are not available
after 2007. Escapement to the other smaller tributaries is thought to be
very low and hatchery contribution high. Resolution of the temporal
distribution of fall- and late-fall run Chinook salmon in the Sandy
river is needed to determine the overall risk of this MPG.

![](./media/media/image68.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="8.411805555555556in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

![https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/iFAGNGdSlCsgXg_LQd7uo0xZUKFu0p_mbv3CdchXAXAjrxd8ZB5J7NVb90Wz-RztQX15R-x5QqdnLWYotuLjeRK45HBZlhvw260ztLBgUgrV2e5icwOaWsIZgLuPysxz1Dphlw](./media/media/image69.png){width="6.0in"
height="7.760416666666667in"}

Figure . Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of the
smoothed natural spawning abundance in year *t*  - smoothed natural
spawning abundance in year (*t* -- 4).   Spawning years on x axis.

+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Population       | MPG   | 1  | 1  | 2  | 2  | 201 | 201 | > \%  |
|                  |       | 99 | 99 | 00 | 00 | 0-2 | 5-2 | > C   |
|                  |       | 0- | 5- | 0- | 5- | 014 | 019 | hange |
|                  |       | 19 | 19 | 20 | 20 |     |     |       |
|                  |       | 94 | 99 | 04 | 09 |     |     |       |
+==================+=======+====+====+====+====+=====+=====+=======+
| Grays/Chinook    | Coast | \( | \( | \  | 83 | 79  | 228 | > 189 |
| (Tule) Chinook   | Fa    | 53 | 81 | (2 | (  | (4  | (5  | >     |
| Fa               |       | \) | \) | 14 | 18 | 48) | 79) |  (29) |
|                  |       |    |    | \) | 8) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Youngs Bay Fa    | Coast |    |    |    |    | 201 | 145 | > -28 |
|                  | Fa    |    |    |    |    | (51 | (16 | >     |
|                  |       |    |    |    |    | 05) | 35) | (-68) |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Big Cr. Fa       | Coast |    |    |    |    | 0   | 0   | > \   |
|                  | Fa    |    |    |    |    | (13 | (22 | (59\) |
|                  |       |    |    |    |    | 89) | 06) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Elo              | Coast | \  | \  | \( | \  | 91  | 95  | > 4   |
| choman/Skamokawa | Fa    | (5 | (6 | 27 | (7 | (6  | (2  | >     |
| (Tule) Chinook   |       | 30 | 61 | 71 | 78 | 12) | 38) | (-61) |
| Fa               |       | \) | \) | \) | \) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Clatskanie R. Fa | Coast |    |    | 27 | 13 | 8   | 3   | > -62 |
|                  | Fa    |    |    | (  | (9 | (   | (   | >     |
|                  |       |    |    | 27 | 1) | 82) | 76) |  (-7) |
|                  |       |    |    | 3) |    |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Mill/A           | Coast | \( | \  | \( | \  | 67  | 28  | > -58 |
| bernathy/Germany | Fa    | 11 | (6 | 24 | (7 | (6  | (1  | >     |
| Cr. (Tule)       |       | 60 | 02 | 16 | 27 | 88) | 51) | (-78) |
| Chinook Fa       |       | \) | \) | \) | \) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Low. Cowlitz     | Ca    | \( | \( | \( | \( | 2   | 3   | > 25  |
| (Tule) Chinook   | scade | 24 | 18 | 58 | 23 | 562 | 208 | >     |
| Fa               | Fa    | 92 | 27 | 18 | 67 | (37 | (41 |  (12) |
|                  |       | \) | \) | \) | \) | 11) | 61) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Coweeman (Tule)  | Ca    | \  | \  | \  | \  | 683 | 543 | > -20 |
| Chinook Fa       | scade | (8 | (7 | (8 | (5 | (8  | (5  | >     |
|                  | Fa    | 77 | 96 | 05 | 26 | 40) | 95) | (-29) |
|                  |       | \) | \) | \) | \) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Toutle (Tule)    | Ca    | \  | \  | \( | \( | 330 | 280 | > -15 |
| Chinook Fa       | scade | (2 | (7 | 46 | 18 | (12 | (5  | >     |
|                  | Fa    | 11 | 88 | 89 | 26 | 90) | 14) | (-60) |
|                  |       | \) | \) | \) | \) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Up. Cowlitz      | Ca    |    | \( | \  | \( | 2   | 1   | > -33 |
| (Tule) Chinook   | scade |    | 42 | (7 | 24 | 646 | 761 | >     |
| Fa               | Fa    |    | \) | 24 | 85 | (77 | (21 | (-72) |
|                  |       |    |    | \) | \) | 79) | 88) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Kalama (Tule)    | Ca    | \( | \( | \( | \( | 540 | 2   | > 297 |
| Chinook Fa       | scade | 27 | 41 | 69 | 61 | (75 | 142 | >     |
|                  | Fa    | 14 | 92 | 11 | 56 | 29) | (38 | (-49) |
|                  |       | \) | \) | \) | \) |     | 08) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Lewis R. (Tule)  | Ca    |    | \( | \( | \( | 1   | 2   | > 32  |
| Chinook Fa       | scade |    | 14 | 34 | 15 | 521 | 003 | >     |
|                  | Fa    |    | 23 | 87 | 99 | (22 | (36 |  (61) |
|                  |       |    | \) | \) | \) | 56) | 37) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Clackamas R. Fa  | Ca    |    |    |    |    | 144 | 236 | > 64  |
|                  | scade |    |    |    |    | (2  | (3  | >     |
|                  | Fa    |    |    |    |    | 92) | 66) |  (25) |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Sandy R. Chinook | Ca    |    |    |    |    | \(  | \(  | > \   |
| Fa               | scade |    |    |    |    | 117 | 207 | (76\) |
|                  | Fa    |    |    |    |    | 6\) | 4\) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Washougal (Tule) | Ca    | \( | \( | \( | \( | 609 | 914 | > 50  |
| Chinook Fa       | scade | 29 | 32 | 43 | 23 | (24 | (16 | >     |
|                  | Fa    | 32 | 27 | 91 | 55 | 86) | 43) | (-34) |
|                  |       | \) | \) | \) | \) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Lewis R. Late    | Ca    | \( | \( | \  | \( | 11  | 8   | > -25 |
| (Bright) Chinook | scade | 83 | 66 | (1 | 57 | 671 | 725 | >     |
| LFR              | LFR   | 53 | 47 | 16 | 58 | (   | (87 | (-25) |
|                  |       | \) | \) | 94 | \) | 116 | 25) |       |
|                  |       |    |    | \) |    | 71) |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Sandy R. LFR     | Ca    | 8  | 8  | 5  | 10 |     |     |       |
| (Bright) Chinook | scade | 52 | 15 | 55 | 97 |     |     |       |
| LFR              | LFR   | (3 | (3 | (2 | (4 |     |     |       |
|                  |       | 59 | 44 | 34 | 62 |     |     |       |
|                  |       | 4) | 0) | 0) | 9) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Up.              | Ca    |    |    |    |    |     | 171 |       |
| Cowlitz/Cispus   | scade |    |    |    |    |     | (54 |       |
| Chinook Sp       | Sp    |    |    |    |    |     | 35) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Kalama Chinook   | Ca    | \  | \  | \  | 57 | 82  | 43  | > -48 |
| Sp               | scade | (1 | (1 | (3 | (  | (   | (   | >     |
|                  | Sp    | 21 | 27 | 37 | 40 | 82) | 43) | (-48) |
|                  |       | \) | \) | \) | 5) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| NF Lewis Chinook | Ca    | \( | \  | \  | \  | \   | \   | >     |
| Sp               | scade | 11 | (3 | (5 | (1 | (14 | (11 | (-23) |
|                  | Sp    | 27 | 08 | 56 | 30 | 5\) | 2\) |       |
|                  |       | \) | \) | \) | \) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Sandy R. Sp      | Ca    |    |    |    |    | 1   | 3   | > 89  |
|                  | scade |    |    |    |    | 778 | 359 | >     |
|                  | Sp    |    |    |    |    | (20 | (36 |  (83) |
|                  |       |    |    |    |    | 00) | 67) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Low. Gorge       | Gorge |    | \( | \( | \  | 928 | 4   | 388   |
| Tribs. (Tule)    | fall  |    | 18 | 11 | (9 | (10 | 528 | (349) |
| Chinook Fa       |       |    | 22 | 57 | 41 | 48) | (47 |       |
|                  |       |    | \) | \) | \) |     | 08) |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Up. Gorge Tribs  | Gorge |    | \  | \  | \  | 561 | 537 | > -4  |
| (Tule) Chinook   | Fa    |    | (2 | (9 | (6 | (15 | (9  | >     |
| Fa               |       |    | 77 | 16 | 21 | 63) | 99) | (-36) |
|                  |       |    | \) | \) | \) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Big White Salmon | Gorge | \  | \  | \( | \  | 759 | 283 | > -63 |
| R. (Tule)        | Fa    | (1 | (1 | 21 | (9 | (9  | (5  | >     |
| Chinook Fa       |       | 27 | 51 | 29 | 39 | 62) | 02) | (-48) |
|                  |       | \) | \) | \) | \) |     |     |       |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+
| Big White Salmon | Gorge |    |    |    |    | 18  | 8   | > -56 |
| R. Chinook Sp    | Sp    |    |    |    |    | (1  | (   | >     |
|                  |       |    |    |    |    | 38) | 50) | (-64) |
+------------------+-------+----+----+----+----+-----+-----+-------+

: Table . Five-year geometric mean of raw wild spawner counts. This is
the raw total spawner count times the fraction wild estimate, if
available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total spawner
counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that a total spawner
count was available but no or only one estimate of wild spawners
available. The geometric mean was computed as the product of counts
raised to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to 5). A
minimum of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean. Percent
change between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on the far
right.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                 MPG           1990-2005      2004-2019
  -------------------------- ------------- -------------- ----------------
  Grays/Chinook (Tule)       Coast Fa                     0.12 (0.08,
  Chinook Fa                                              0.15)

  Clatskanie R. Fa           Coast Fa                     -0.16 (-0.23,
                                                          -0.09)

  Sandy R. LFR               Cascade late  0.01 (-0.05,   
                             Fa            0.07)          

  Kalama Chinook Sp          Cascade Sp                   -0.05 (-0.09,
                                                          -0.01)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log natural spawner abundance computed
  from a linear regression applied to the smoothed natural spawner log
  abundance estimate. Only populations with at least 4 natural spawner
  estimates from 1980 to 2014 are shown and with at least 2 data points
  in the first 5 years and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

#### Late-Fall Run MPG

The Lewis River late-fall DIP in this MPG is likely the most viable in
this ESU. The Lewis River late-fall DIP has the largest natural-origin
abundance in the ESU, 8,725 and although the short-term abundance trend
is negative (Table 28), there is a stable long-term trend (Table 29). 
Merwin Dam, on the North Fork Lewis River limits the amount of available
spawning habitat for late-fall-run Chinook salmon, but also controls
flows and temperatures.  The Sandy River late-fall run is no longer
directly monitored; the most recent estimate was 373 spawners in 2010
(Takata 2011)). Instead, abundance estimates for Sandy River fall-run
and late fall-run Chinook salmon are combined by ODFW into a single
Sandy River fall run data series, which increased during the recent
review period, five-year geomean 2,074, a 76% increase.  Both the Lewis
River and Sandy River late-fall run maintain their abundances without
supplementation.  Although there is some uncertainty in the status of
Sandy River late-fall run Chinook salmon, this MPG appears to be at a
relatively low risk. 

### Harvest

Lower Columbia River Chinook salmon include populations representing
three distinct life-history components: spring-run Chinook, tule
fall-run Chinook, and late fall-run Chinook.  These different components
are subject to different in-river fisheries (mainstem and tributary)
because of differences in river entry timing, but share relatively
similar ocean distributions.  Harvest rates for populations with
different run timings share similar exploitation rate patterns, but
differ in absolute harvest rates.  With a run-timing, tributary-specific
harvest rates may differ. All populations saw a drop in exploitation
rates in the early 1990s in response to decreases in abundance. There
has been a modest increase since then (Figure 54).  Ocean fishery impact
rates have been relatively stable in the past few years, with the
exception of the bright fall component of the ESU.

![](./media/media/image70.emf){width="6.5in"
height="3.0069444444444446in"}

Figure *.* Total exploitation rates on the three components of the Lower
Columbia River Chinook ESU.  Data for tule fall Chinook from
exploitation rate analysis of aggregate tule stock made up of tag codes
from the Big Creek, Cowlitz, Kalama, and Washougal hatcheries.  Data for
Late Fall-Run Chinook from the CTC exploitation rate analysis for Lewis
River late-fall run.  Data for spring Chinook from CTC model calibration
1503 (CTC in prep) for Willamette River spring Chinook for ocean impacts
and TAC run reconstruction data for in-river impacts using an aggregate
of Cowlitz, Kalama, Lewis, and Sandy River spring-run Chinook salmon
(ODFW & WDFW 2020a, b).

### Spatial structure and diversity

#### Hatcheries

During the interim since the 2015 Status Review update, there have been
a number of changes in both the quality and quantity of hatchery
production in the Lower Columbia River.  Foremost among these is a
reduction in the production of tule fall-run Chinook salmon from
Mitchell Act Hatcheries below Bonneville Dam (NMFS 2017a). 
Specifically, a reduction in or termination of fall-run Chinook salmon
programs in Big Creek, Deep River, the Kalama River, and the Washougal
River.  These reductions in fall-run Chinook salmon releases in the
Coastal (Figure 55) and Cascade Stratum (Figure 56) have been offset by
increases in fall run Chinook salmon in the Gorge Strata (Figure 57).
Additionally, broodstock sources for Mitchell Act Hatcheries are
required to come from within Strata/MPG sources by 2022 (NMFS 2017a).  

![](./media/media/image71.png){width="6.5in"
height="4.254861111111111in"}

Figure .  Annual releases of Chinook salmon juveniles into the Coastal
Strata of the Lower Columbia River Chinook Salmon ESU from 1995 to
2019.  In and Out indicate whether the source of the release originally
came from within or outside of the ESU.  Releases of fish weighing less
than 2.5g were removed.  Data from the Regional Mark Information System
(https://www.rmpc.org, accessed 14 April 2020).

The HSRG (HSRG 2009) identified the use of out-of-basin stocks in Select
Area Fishery Evaluation (SAFE) areas in the Lower Columbia River as a
concern, especially in light of the high level of straying onto nearby
spawning grounds.  Approximately 400,000 out-of-ESU Rogue River Bright
(RRB) fall-run Chinook salmon are currently being released into Youngs
Bay, creating a potential for interaction with natural-origin fall-run
juveniles and adults (Figure 55).  In the past, naturally produced
juvenile Rogue River Chinook salmon and RRB x LCR fall-run Chinook
salmon juvenile hybrids have been detected in nearby tributaries on the
Washington State side of the Lower Columbia River (Marshall 1997). 
Naturalized and hatchery-origin Rogue River Bright (aka SAB) fall-run
Chinook salmon have also been recovered during spawning surveys in the
Grays River (Rawding *et al.* 2014), although many first generation
hatchery-origin fish were removed at the weir on the Grays River. 
Releases of out-of-ESU Upper Willamette River spring-run Chinook salmon
into Oregon tributaries near the mouth of the Columbia River may not
pose a long-term genetic risk, due to the absence of spring-run spawning
habitat in the Coastal Strata; but may pose a risk to natural-origin
juveniles due to competition and predation.  There is also the potential
for the incidental take or hooking mortality of natural-origin fish in
the targeted fisheries in the SAFE zone.  The continued large scale
release of both native and non-native Chinook salmon hatchery stocks
into the Youngs Bay and Big Creek DIPs will likely constrain the
recovery of these populations, which are currently identified as only
"secondary populations" in the recovery plan.

![](./media/media/image72.png){width="6.013888888888889in"
height="3.2222222222222223in"}

Figure . Annual releases of juvenile Chinook salmon from hatcheries into
the Cascade Strata of the Lower Columbia River ESU.  "In" and "Out"
designations indicate whether the original sources of the releases were
from within or outside of the ESU respectfully.  Late-Fall Out releases
were primarily of Upriver Bright stocks, and Spring Out releases
primarily represented sources from the Upper Willamette River ESU. 
Releases of fish weighing less than 2.5g were not included in this
graphic.  Data from RMIS (<http://www.rmpc.org/> accessed 14 April
2020).

Releases of Chinook salmon into the Cascade Strata have been relatively
stable in recent years.  There have been some reductions in the number
of fall-run Chinook salmon in an effort to decrease the contribution of
hatchery-origin fish to naturally-spawning adults.  Spring-run Chinook
salmon production has continued, in part, due to the inaccessibility of
historical spring-run spawning and rearing habitat.  The termination of
the non-native late fall-run Chinook salmon below Bonneville Dam has
decreased the risk of introgression between native natural and
hatchery-origin fish.

Hatchery production in the Gorge Strata has focused on the production of
fall-run Chinook salmon from Spring Creek NFH, which decreased during
the 2015-2019 period.  The release of several million non-native Upriver
(late-fall) Brights has continued, as has the release of non-native
Carson Hatchery spring-run Chinook salmon.  It was noted that large
numbers of feral and hatchery-origin Upriver Brights were observed
spawning in the Big White Salmon River (LCFRB 2020).  Similarly,
late-fall Chinook salmon (Upriver Brights) are also observed spawning in
large numbers (1,000s) below Bonneville Dam, near Ives Island.  These
large feral populations are a diversity risk to native fall-run
populations.

Reductions in the potential influence of hatchery-origin fish in Lower
Columbia River tributaries are also being implemented via the operation
of weirs in a number of basins in both Washington and Oregon in order to
remove hatchery-origin Chinook salmon before they can spawn naturally
(Whitman *et al.* 2017; Wilson *et al.* 2019).  At the same time, the
release of non-native (out-of-ESU) hatchery-origin fish continues in a
number of locales.  Overall, the potential risk from hatchery operations
to diversity has diminished somewhat during this period.

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/hr4TgJavQGjQhUo2H4SQrakx7qTxSNdDWic3cLLvFuDLYOSvzF2eVEp6JoBmsJ4qxW-2EdzgC9PWOOMZ8hIvF43KWMBjpwJSkJcX8tKgGO6SG8Yb-JZhFXvyDHU5Sy0UxjY8Dg](./media/media/image73.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.3020833333333335in"}

Figure . Annual releases of juvenile Chinook salmon from hatcheries into
the Gorge Strata of the Lower Columbia River ESU.  "In" and "Out"
designations indicate whether the original sources of the releases were
from within or outside of the ESU respectfully.  Late-Fall Out releases
were primarily of Upriver Bright stocks, and Spring Out releases were
primarily sources from Carson Hatchery, Klickitat Hatchery, and
Deschutes River (Klickitat River Spring Run Chinook salmon are included
in the Middle Columbia River Spring Run ESU and released into the Gorge
Strata).  Releases of fish weighing less than 2.5g were not included in
this graphic.  Data from RMIS
([[http://www.rmpc.org/]{.underline}](http://www.rmpc.org/) accessed 14
April 2020).

#### Spatial Structure

There have been a number of large-scale efforts to improve
accessibility, one of the primary metrics for spatial structure, in this
ESU.  Passage efforts on the Cowlitz River at Cowlitz Falls began in
1996 for Chinook salmon and other salmonids.  There have been a number
of structural and operational changes in the collection protocol for
out-migrating juveniles (Serl & Morrill 2010), with collection
efficiencies averaging 28.8% for Chinook salmon during 2006-2009.  More
recently, the installation of a new collection structure at Cowlitz
Falls Dam appears to provide improved collection efficiency and
survival, 78.7% fish passage survival for Chinook salmon in 2019
(Rubenson et al. 2019).  Adult returns in 2020 and 2021 will be the
first opportunity to assess the benefit of these improvements.  In
addition, the collection of juvenile fall-run Chinook salmon from the
Tilton River at Mayfield Dam appears to be relatively successful with
increasing numbers of fall-run Chinook salmon returning in the last few
years.  Spring-run reintroductions are not planned for the Tilton
River.  The Sediment Retention Structure (SRS) on the North Fork Toutle
River remains an impediment to fish passage in the North Fork Toutle
River.  Additionally, the existing Toutle Fish Collection Facility is
limited in its capacity to attract fish for transport (LCFRB 2020).  On
the Hood River, Powerdale Dam was removed in 2010 and while this dam
previously allowed fish passage, removal of the dam is thought to have
eliminated passage delays and injuries.  Condit Dam, on the White Salmon
River, was removed in 2011 and this provided access to previously
inaccessible habitat.  Spawner surveys of the White Salmon River
indicate that both hatchery-origin and unmarked (presumed
natural-origin) Chinook salmon colonizing newly accessible habitat
(LCFRB 2020).  Fish passage operations for spring-run Chinook salmon
(trap and haul) were begun on the Lewis River in 2012, reestablishing
access to historically-occupied habitat above Swift Dam (RKm 77.1), few
adults have been available for passage and juvenile passage efficiencies
were initially poor for Chinook salmon, but recent modifications to the
collector at Swift Dam have shown improvements in efficiency (PacifiCorp
2020).  

Once passage actions are undertaken it may still take several years for
the benefits to become evident.  For example, the removal of Marmot Dam
in 2007 and the Little Sandy River diversion dam in 2008, have clearly
demonstrated improvement in the abundance of spring-run Chinook salmon
returning to the Sandy River during this most recent period.  Still,
several programs are continue to improve their operations and may
achieve fish collection efficiencies suitable to support sustainable
populations in previously inaccessible habitat sometime in the near
future (5-10 years). In addition to these large-scale efforts, there
have been a number of recovery actions throughout the ESU to remove or
improve thousands of sub-standard culverts and other small-scale passage
barriers, as well as breaching dikes to provide access to juvenile
habitat.  

Although the spatial structure contribution to Lower Columbia River
Chinook salmon ESU viability has improved during the most current review
period (2015-2019), effective access to upstream habitat in the Cowlitz
and Lewis River basins remains the major limitation. 

![https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/2mlFqIKfYWpzDxGGfgbWxX1tEDDycaJJn2jl-X1-cvf0j82iB2v4Rm-BnK4-xXEobpN6Wctc05X6RkGJygo4oHZh-ZCYW_9DxCM71-0REPytlCVISsi6FFyijZWScbgmItTLKg](./media/media/image74.png){width="6.0in"
height="7.760416666666667in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in the estimated fraction of the natural
spawning Lower Columbia River Chinook salmon population consisting of
fish of natural origin.  Points show the annual raw estimates, where
available.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population               1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ------------------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Grays R. Fall            \-          \-          0.36        0.22        0.43

  Youngs Bay Fall          \-          \-          \-          0.04        0.14

  Big Creek Fall           \-                                  0.03        0.04

  Elochoman R. Fall        \-          \-          \-          0.17        0.45

  Clatskanie R. Fall       \-          0.10        0.19        0.09        0.05

  Mill/Abernathy/Germany   \-          \-          \-          0.11        0.22
  Cr. Fall                                                                 

  Low. Cowlitz R. Fall     \-          \-          \-          0.70        0.77

  Coweeman R. Fall         \-          \-          \-          0.82        0.91

  Toutle R. Fall           \-          \-          \-          0.31        0.55

  Up. Cowlitz R. Fall      \-          \-          \-          0.35        0.82

  Kalama R. Fall           \-          \-          \-          0.08        0.57

  Lewis R. Fall            \-          \-          \-          0.67        0.56

  Clackamas R. Fall        \-          \-          \-          0.60        0.68

  Sandy R. Fall            \-          \-          \-          \-          \-

  Washougal R. Fall        \-          \-          \-          0.30        0.58

  Lewis R. LFR             \-          \-          \-          1.00        1.00

  Sandy R. LFR             0.24        0.24        0.24        \-          \-

  Up. Cowlitz R. Spring    \-          \-          \-          0.08        0.06

  Kalama R. Spring         \-          \-          \-          1.00        1.00

  Sandy R. Spring          \-          \-          \-          0.89        0.92

  Low. Gorge Tribs. Fall   \-          \-          \-          0.89        0.96

  Up. Gorge Tribs. Fall    \-          \-          \-          0.40        0.58

  White Salmon R. Fall     \-          \-          \-          0.80        0.57

  White Salmon R. Spring   \-          \-          \-          0.13        0.18
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year mean of fraction wild Lower Columbia River
  steelhead spawners (sum of all estimates divided by the number of
  estimates) for 1995-2019. Blanks (-) indicate that no estimate
  available in that 5-year range.

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

Of the 32 DIPs in this ESU, 7 of 32 populations are at or near the
recovery viability goals (Table 31) set in the recovery plan (Dornbush
2013).  The 7 DIPs included: 1 spring-run, 5 fall-run, and 1
late-fall-run DIP.  Furthermore, 6 of the 7 DIPs were located in the
Cascade Strata, with most of the populations in the Coastal and Gorge
Strata doing rather poorly.  The most of the remaining populations still
require substantial improvements in abundance to reach their viability
goals.  The estimated proportion of hatchery-origin spawners was well in
excess of the limits set in the recovery plan for many of the primary
populations (Dornbush 2013).  Of greater concern was the large number of
DIPs (10) that either had no abundance information (presumed near zero)
or exist at very low abundances.  All of the Coastal and Gorge MPG
fall-run populations (except the Lower Gorge DIP) likely fell within the
high to very-high risk categories.  Similarly, with the exception of the
Sandy River spring-run DIP, all of the spring-run DIPs in the Cascade
and Gorge MPGs are at high to very high risk categories, with a number
of populations at or near zero, while others may only persist through
hatchery supplementation.  The Cascade fall-run MPG contains populations
a number of populations above or near their recovery goals, while the
Cascade late-fall MPG may be near viability although, there is some
uncertainty in the abundance estimates for the Sandy-River late-fall
DIP.

Some populations met the hatchery contribution criteria for primary or
contributing populations established by the HSRG (2009) during the
20115-2019 period, although other populations did not meet the criteria
but did improve in the proportion of natural origin spawners.  Among
these were the Coweeman River fall run, Lewis River late-fall run, and
Lewis River fall-runs.  No criteria were established for stabilizing
populations. Thus, only one MPG may have meet its viability goals, with
most other MPGs far from the recovery goals.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Abundance     
  ---------- ---------------------------------- ------------- ------------
  Stratum    Population                         2015-2019     Target

  Coast      Grays/Chinook River (WA) Fa        228           1,000

             Youngs Bay (OR) Fa                 145           505

             Big Creek (OR) Fa                  0             577

             Elochoman/Skamokawa (WA) Fa        95            1,500

             Clatskanie River (OR) Fa           3             1,277

             Mill/Abernathy/Germany Cr (WA) Fa  28            900

             Scappoose Cr (OR) Fa               NA            1,222

  Cascade    Lower Cowlitz River (WA) Fa        3,208         3,000

             Upper Cowlitz River (WA) Fa        1,761         NA

             Toutle River (WA) Fa               280           4,000

             Coweeman River (WA)                543           900

             Kalama River (WA) Fa               2,142         500

             Lewis River (WA) Fa                2,003         1,500

             Salmon Cr (WA) Fa                  NA            NA

             Clackamas River (OR) Fa            236           1,551

             Sandy River (OR) Fa                (2,074)       1,031

             Washougal River (WA) Fa            914           1,200

             NF Lewis River (WA) LFa            8,725         7,300

             Sandy River (OR) LFa               NA            3,561

             Toutle River (WA) Sp               NA            1,100

             Upper Cowlitz River (WA) Sp        171           1,800

             Cispus River (WA) Sp               NA            1,800

             Tilton River (WA) Sp               NA            100

             Sandy River (OR) Sp                3,359         1,230

             Kalama River (WA) Sp               43            300

             NF Lewis River (WA) Sp             \(112\)       1,500

  Gorge      Lower Gorge (WA & OR) Fa           4,528         1,200

             Upper Gorge (WA & OR) Fa           537           1,200

             White Salmon River (WA) Fa         283           500

             Hood River (OR) Fa                 NA            1,245

             White Salmon River (WA) Sp         8             500

             Hood River (OR) Sp                 NA            1,493
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table .  Current 5-year geometric mean of raw natural-origin spawner
  abundances and recovery targets (Dornbush and Sihler 2013) for Lower
  Columbia River steelhead demographically independent populations
  (DIPs).  Colors indicate the relative proportion of the recovery
  target currently obtained: red (\<10%), orange (10%\>x\<50%), yellow
  (50%\>x\<100%), green (\>100%).  Numbers in () represent total
  (hatchery + origin) spawners and are highlighted yellow to underscore
  the uncertainty in meeting recovery targets.

### Updated biological risk summary

Overall, there has been little change since the last status review in
the biological status of Chinook salmon populations in the Lower
Columbia River ESU (NWFSC 2015), although some populations did exhibit
marked improvements (Figure 52).  Increases in abundance were noted in
about half of the fall-run populations and 75% of the spring-run
population for which data were available.   Decreases in hatchery
contribution were also noted for several populations.  Relative to
baseline VSP levels identified in the Recovery Plan (Dornbush 2013)
there has been an overall improvement in the status of a number of
fall-run populations (Table 28), although most are still far from the
recovery plan goals.

Improved fall-run status reflects both changes in biological status and
improved monitoring.  Spring-run Chinook populations in this ESU are
generally unchanged; most of the populations are at a high or very high
risk due to low abundances and the high proportion of hatchery-origin
fish spawning naturally.  In contrast, the spring-run Chinook salmon DIP
in the Sandy River has a 5-year average of 3,359, nearly double the
previous five-year average.  This appears to be due, in part, to the
removal of Marmot Dam (eliminating migrational delays and passage
injuries) and the diversion dam on the Little Sandy River (restoring
access and flow to historical habitat).  Elsewhere in the ESU, many of
the spring-run populations rely upon passage programs at high head dams
and downstream juvenile collection efficiencies are still too low to
maintain self-sustaining natural runs.  Limited numbers of
naturally-produced spring run fish return to the Cowlitz and Cispus
rivers (no spring-run fish are transported into the Tilton River Basin),
and the status of spring-run Chinook salmon in the Toutle River Basin
remains unclear.  The removal of Condit Dam on the White Salmon River
has provided an opportunity for the reestablishment of
naturally-spawning fall and spring-run populations with volitional
access to historical spawning grounds.  The status of spring-run Chinook
salmon in the Hood River is unclear; with the removal of Powerdale Dam,
there is minimal monitoring in the basin and the abundance and genetic
composition of returning spring-run Chinook salmon is unknown.  It
remains to be determined if any native spring-run Chinook salmon remain,
or if they have been supplanted by Deschutes River (Middle Columbia
River Spring Run Chinook salmon ESU).

Many of the populations in this ESU remain at high risk, with low
natural-origin abundance levels.  Hatchery contributions remain high for
a number of populations, and it is likely that many returning unmarked
adults are the progeny of hatchery-origin parents, especially where
large hatchery programs operate.  While overall hatchery production has
been reduced slightly, hatchery-produced fish still represent a majority
of fish returning to the ESU.  The continued release of out-of-ESU
stocks, including Upriver Bright fall run, Rogue River (SAB) fall run,
Upper Willamette River spring run, Carson Hatchery spring run, and
Deschutes River spring run, remains a concern.  Harvest rates are a
potential concern, especially for low abundance tule fall-run
populations.  There have been a number of notable efforts to restore
migratory access to areas upstream of dams, until efforts to improve
juvenile passage systems bear fruition, it is unlikely that there will
be significant improvements in the status of many spring-run
populations.  Alternatively, dam removals (Condit Dam, Marmot Dam, and
Powerdale Dam) not only improve/provide access, but allow the
restoration of hydrological processes that may improve downstream
habitat conditions.  Continued land development and habitat degradation
in combination with the potential effects of climate change may present
a continuing strong negative influence into the foreseeable future. 
Finally, although many of the populations in this ESU are at high risk,
it is important to note the poor ocean and freshwater conditions existed
during the 2015-2019 period and despite these conditions the status of a
number of populations improved, some remarkably so (Grays River, Lower
Cowlitz River, and Kalama River fall runs).

## Lower Columbia River coho salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU

Lower Columbia River coho salmon were identified as an ESU and listed as
threatened in 2005.  The listing included a redelineation to incorporate
southwest Washington tributaries in the Coastal major population group
(MPG).  This ESU includes all naturally spawned populations of coho
salmon in the Columbia River and its tributaries in Washington and
Oregon, from the mouth of the Columbia River up to and including the Big
White Salmon and Hood Rivers, and includes the Willamette River to
Willamette Falls, Oregon, as well as multiple artificial propagation
programs (85 FR 81822, Figure 59).  Myers *et al* (2006) identified
three MPGs (Coastal, Cascade, and Gorge), containing a total of 24
demographically independent populations (DIPs) in the Lower Columbia
River coho salmon ESU. 

![](./media/media/image75.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Map of the Lower Columbia River coho salmon ESU's spawning and
rearing areas, illustrating demographically independent populations
(DIPs) and major population groups (MPGs).  Areas that are accessible
(green), accessible only via trap and haul programs (yellow), or blocked
(cross-hatched) are indicated accordingly.

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2005*

NMFS reviewed the status of the Lower Columbia River coho salmon ESU in
1996, again in 2001 and in 2005.  In the 2001 review, the BRT was
concerned that the vast majority (over 90%) of historical populations in
the Lower Columbia River coho salmon ESU appeared to be either
extirpated or nearly so. The two populations with significant production
(Sandy and Clackamas rivers) were at appreciable risk because of low
abundance, declining trends, and failure to respond after a dramatic
reduction in harvest.  The large number of hatchery coho salmon in the
ESU was also considered an important risk factor.  The majority of the
2001 BRT votes were for "at risk of extinction" with a substantial
minority "likely to become endangered."  As a result of the 2001 BRT
review, the ESU was identified as a "candidate species", but not listed
under the ESA as threatened or endangered.  An updated status evaluation
was conducted in 2005, also with a majority of BRT votes for "at risk of
extinction" and a substantial minority for "likely to become
endangered."  This BRT evaluation resulted in a "threatened"
determination in 2005.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) noted that three status evaluations of LCR coho
status, all based on WLC-TRT criteria, had been conducted since the
prior BRT status update in 2005.  All three evaluations concluded that
the ESU was currently at very high risk of extinction.  Of the 24
historical populations in the ESU, 21 were considered at very high
risk.  The remaining three (Sandy, Clackamas and Scappoose) were
considered to be at high to moderate risk.  All of the populations to
the north of the Columbia River (in Washington State) were considered at
very high risk, although uncertainty was high because of a lack of adult
spawner surveys.  As was noted in the 2005 BRT evaluation, smolt traps
indicated some natural production in Washington populations, though
given the high fraction of hatchery origin spawners thought to occur in
these populations it was not clear that any were truly self-sustaining. 
Overall, the new information that was considered in 2010 did not
indicate a change in the biological risk category since the time of the
last BRT status review in 2005.

In 2010, the ESU Boundaries Review Group (see ESU Boundaries section in
Ford *et al*. 2011) undertook a reevaluation of the boundary between all
lower Columbia and mid- Columbia ESUs and DPSs.  The review's
conclusions emphasized the transitional nature of the boundary between
the lower Columbia ESUs and the mid-Columbia ESUs. The original Lower
Columbia coho salmon ESU boundary was assigned based largely on
extrapolation from information about the boundaries for Chinook and
steelhead. The ESU Boundaries Review Group concluded, "It is therefore
reasonable to assign the Klickitat population to the lower Columbia coho
ESU. This would establish a common boundary for Chinook salmon, coho
salmon, chum salmon, and steelhead at the Celilo Falls (Dalles Dam)." To
date, this recommendation has not been officially implemented;
therefore, the current status review will utilize preexisting ESU
boundaries.

*2015*

The 2015 Status Review reported improvements in coho salmon abundance
and productivity, diversity and spatial structure; however, this
appeared to be mostly due to the improved level of monitoring (more
complete accounting) rather than a true change in status over time
(NWFSC 2015).  In the absence of specific abundance and diversity data,
previous status reviews had concluded that hatchery origin fish
dominated many of the coho populations in the Lower Columbia River ESU
and that there was little natural productivity.  Recovery efforts likely
also contributed to the observed increases in natural production, but in
the absence of longer term data sets it is not possible to parse out
these effects.  Populations with longer term data sets exhibited either
stable or slightly positive abundance trends.  Juvenile passage
facilities at Cowlitz Falls, Merwin (Lewis River), and North Fork
(Clackamas River) dams were being improved and had the potential to
provide upstream populations with better access to high quality
habitat.  These and other recovery efforts were thought to likely
improve the status of a number of coho salmon DIPs, abundances, however,
remained at low levels and the majority of the DIPs were at moderate or
high risk.  For the Lower Columbia River region land development and
increasing human population pressures continued to degrade habitat,
especially in lowland areas.  Although populations in this ESU were
generally improved, especially in the 2013/14 and 2014/15 return years,
poor ocean conditions foreshadowed declines in the upcoming return
years.  This ESU was considered to be at moderate risk of extinction.

### Description of new data available for this review

Efforts to standardize and expand monitoring efforts have resulted in
abundance time series for a number of populations in this ESU.  Guidance
provided by Crawford and Rumsey (2011) emphasized the need for a common
set of population parameters that could be used to evaluate VSP criteria
across all populations.  In 2010 WDFW expanded their efforts to survey
Chinook and coho salmon in the Lower Columbia River, specifically
focusing on data appropriate for evaluating VSP criteria (Rawding *et
al.* 2014).  Monitoring efforts cover all of the coho salmon populations
in the Lower Columbia River, with limited monitoring in Youngs Bay and
Upper Gorge populations (Rawding & Rodgers 2013).  These data included:
abundance, proportion hatchery-origin spawners, age and sex.  Similar
efforts have been undertaken by ODFW to more uniformly undertake spawner
surveys across the Oregon Coast and Lower Columbia River through their
Oregon Adult Salmonid Inventory & Sampling (OASIS) project. 
Methodologies include expansions of index reach redd counts, tributary
weir counts, mark/recapture surveys, and hatchery trap, dam trap, and
dam ladder counts.  

### Abundance and productivity

#### Coast Range Cascade MPG

Both short-term and long-term trends for almost all coho salmon
populations were negative during the 2015-2019 review period for six of
the seven populations that were analyzed (Table 32).  Only the
Mill/Abernathy/Germany DIP abundance was stable, with a five-year
geomean of 685.  Negative trends were heavily biased by the strong adult
return in 2014 and the poor return in 2015.  In the absence of data from
these two markedly different years the trends would likely be largely
flat (Figure 60).  Average natural-origin abundances were in the
hundreds of fish, with the exception of the Youngs Bay and likely Big
Creek DIPs, which are not monitored except at the hatchery racks.  Given
the propensity of coho salmon to spawn in smaller tributaries and the
year-long freshwater residence of juveniles, the poor freshwater
conditions during this period likely affected coho salmon in the Coastal
Strata more than in the larger rivers of the Cascade Strata.

#### Western Cascade MPG

As with the Coastal MPG, coho salmon population in the Western Cascade
MPG experienced a marked decline in abundance following the "boom" year
of 2014. The five-year geometric means for these populations were in the
high hundreds to low thousands, with the exception of the Kalama River
and Washougal River DIPs.  Population trends were strongly negative,
with the exception of the small Kalama River and Salmon Creek
populations.  The Salmon Creek DIP, experienced a slight decline in
five-year geometric abundance (4% decline), but maintains a relatively
high absolute abundance for a relatively small basin with a five-year
geomean of 1,546 (Table 5).  Population trends were certainly affected
by the very poor spawner counts in 2015.  Longer term, 14-year average
trends were largely stable, not significantly different from zero,
except for the Upper Cowlitz/Cispus river group (two combined DIPs) that
was slightly negative.

The Clackamas River was one of the two populations identified in the
original 1996 Status Review that appeared to be self-sustaining natural
populations.  While recent returns of unmarked fish to the Clackamas
River have shown a marked decline since the 2014-2015 record return year
when 10,670 spawners were counted, the 21% decline is one of the
smallest in the MPG.  The long-term (14-year) trend for this population
is slightly positive (Table 33), and the current five-year geomean of
2,889 is still the largest abundance in the ESU (Table 32). 
Improvements in juvenile downstream passage at dams on the Clackamas
River may have counterbalanced the poor environmental conditions. 
Improvements in juvenile collection at Cowlitz Falls have occurred too
recently to be reflected in natural spawner numbers.  The six
populations in the Cowlitz Basin account for the majority of
naturally-spawning coho salmon in the MPG, with the Lower Cowlitz River
late-run coho salmon DIP five-year geomean of 2,622. In the Cowlitz
Basin, those coho salmon populations that relied on dam passage programs
(Upper Cowlitz/Cispus rivers and Tilton River) exhibited a greater
decline relative to those populations located below the high head dams
(Lower Cowlitz River, NF and SF Toutle rivers, and Coweeman River).  The
populations above dams on the Cowlitz River, the North Fork Lewis River
DIP, the Kalama River DIP and the Washougal River DIP also include large
numbers of hatchery origin spawners, in excess of 70% of the total
population.  Otherwise, the proportion of hatchery-origin spawners in
most populations was generally less than 30%.

Within the recent five-year review period, improvements in ocean and
freshwater conditions likely influenced the upturn in abundance (Figure
60), and resulted in positive productivity estimates for a number of
populations (Figure 61).

This MPG contains most of the ESU's large river basins and hosts the
majority of the ESU's abundance.  

#### Columbia Gorge MPG

Natural origin abundances in this MPG are low, the two populations
available (upper Gorge tributaries associated with the Hood River and
White Salmon River) but had geomeans of less than 50 (Table 32). 
Hatchery-origin fish contribute a large proportion of the total number
of spawners, most notably in the Hood River.  The trend was strongly
negative in the Hood River and slightly positive in the White Salmon
River.  With the exception of the Hood and Big White Salmon Rivers, much
of the spawning habitat is in small independent tributaries to the
Columbia River and in many cases the accessibility is relatively poor. 
Monitoring has been limited in the smaller tributaries in Gorge strata,
and although insufficient data was available for statistical analysis it
important to note that natural origin coho salmon were observed.

#### Other Populations

Not included in this ESU are coho salmon that migrate above Willamette
Falls; 7,464 natural-origin adult coho salmon were counted at the falls
in 2019.  Coho have not been planted in the Upper Willamette Basin since
1996, and it is believed that these fish are the progeny of Lower
Columbia River origin coho salmon (Myers *et al.* 2006; Keefer *et al.*
2018).  Coho salmon spawning mostly takes place in the Westside
tributaries to the Upper Willamette River, primarily the Tualatin
River.  We have also not included coho salmon migrating upstream of the
Dalles Dam or in the Klickitat River, these are almost entirely the
progeny of fish introduced into Mid- and Upper-Columbia and Snake River
tributaries from LCR hatchery populations.  In 2019, 38,742 adult coho
salmon were counted at the Dalles Dam, these include both
hatchery-origin releases in the Interior Columbia River Basin and the
progeny of naturally-spawning fish.  In both cases these fish are
spawning outside of the historical boundaries of the Lower Columbia
River ESU.  Historically, coho salmon populations existed above the
Dalles Dam, but were extirpated during the last century.

![](./media/media/image76.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="8.411805555555556in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/W3tluTniMyGBsh1GozPRE0bpV2Hp23fAk44vE_UtFVD10Eu7AXSAv2w7dejnij89p1YWRTwAvbS0KgmG4oH3yk0yGKPk8T9A6sb5hQXVEugP-Mn1fc4GTogO_R6wPeP_Vni4ww](./media/media/image77.png){width="6.0in"
height="6.708333333333333in"}

Figure . Trends in Lower Columbia River coho salmon population
productivity, estimated as the log of the smoothed natural spawning
abundance in year *t*  - smoothed natural spawning abundance in year
(*t* -- 3).

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population               MPG       1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                             Change
  ------------------------ --------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Grays/Chinook R. Late    Coast     \-          \-          \-          \-          412 (1644)  212 (843)   -49
                                                                                                             (-49)

  Youngs Bay Late          Coast     \-          \-          \(41\)      \(12\)      \(18\)      \(14\)      (-22)

  Big Cr. Late             Coast     \-          \-          \(117\)     \(249\)     \(251\)     \(122\)     (-51)

  Elochoman R. Late        Coast     \-          \-          \-          \-          738 (1478)  558 (874)   -24
                                                                                                             (-41)

  Clatskanie R. Late       Coast     \-          \-          335 (364)   745 (771)   1262 (1343) 199 (286)   -84
                                                                                                             (-79)

  Mill/Abernathy/Germany   Coast     \-          \-          \-          \-          684 (766)   685 (767)   0 (0)
  Cr. Late                                                                                                   

  Scappoose R. Late        Coast     \-          \-          502 (535)   464 (469)   717 (717)   448 (454)   -38
                                                                                                             (-37)

  Lower Cowlitz R. Late    Cascade                                                   5243 (5934) 2622 (3102) -50
                                                                                                             (-48)

  Coweeman R. Late         Cascade                                                   3185 (3502) 1987 (2241) -38
                                                                                                             (-36)

  NF Toutle R. (early &    Cascade                                                   1480 (2174) 819 (1502)  -45
  late)                                                                                                      (-31)

  SF Toutle R. (early &    Cascade                                                   2199 (2605) 1075 (1407) -51
  late)                                                                                                      (-46)

  Upper Cowlitz R. (early  Cascade               0 (6090)    4065        5119        1093        631 (4370)  -42
  & late)                                                    (37862)     (20256)     (13886)                 (-69)

  Tilton R. (early & late) Cascade               1756 (3451) 967 (13414) 995 (3573)  2362 (6773) 1932 (4187) -18
                                                                                                             (-38)

  Kalama R. Late           Cascade                                                   15 (328)    43 (180)    187
                                                                                                             (-45)

  NF Lewis R. (early &     Cascade                                                   1350 (2954) 1275 (6692) -6 (127)
  late)                                                                                                      

  EF Lewis R. (early &     Cascade                                                   1850 (2126) 686 (1041)  -63
  late)                                                                                                      (-51)

  Salmon Cr. Late          Cascade                                                   1614 (1654) 1546 (1648) -4 (0)

  Clackamas R. (early &    Cascade   1816 (2787) 502 (768)   2891 (4497) 2995 (5118) 3645 (4174) 2889 (3226) -21
  late)                                                                                                      (-23)

  Sandy R. (early & late)  Cascade                                       1094 (1170) 1708 (1851) 854 (889)   -50
                                                                                                             (-52)

  Washougal R. Late        Cascade                                                   478 (763)   174 (694)   -64 (-9)

  Hood R. Early            Gorge                                         273 (471)   183 (751)   29 (64)     -84
                                                                                                             (-91)

  WA Up. Gorge             Gorge                                         53 (72)     39 (53)     45 (60)     15 (13)
  Tribs./White Salmon R.                                                                                     
  Late                                                                                                       
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year geometric mean of natural-origin spawner (NOS)
  counts for Lower Columbia River chum salmon. The Upper Gorge Chum
  salmon abundance is the dam count at Bonneville Dam and not a spawner
  estimate.  This is the raw total spawner count times the fraction NOS
  estimate, if available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw
  total spawner counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that
  a total spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of NOS
  available. The geometric mean was computed as the product of counts
  raised to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to 5). A
  minimum of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean. Percent
  change between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on the far
  right.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                        MPG       1990-2005      2004-2019
  --------------------------------- --------- -------------- ---------------
  Clatskanie R. Late                Coast     \-             -0.04 (-0.09,
                                                             0.02)

  Scappoose R. Late                 Coast     \-             0 (-0.05, 0.05)

  Up. Cowlitz R. (early & late)     Cascade   \-             -0.1 (-0.15,
                                                             -0.05)

  Tilton R. Both (early & late)     Cascade   \-             0 (-0.06, 0.05)

  Clackamas R. Both (early & late)  Cascade   0.04 (-0.05,   0.02 (-0.03,
                                              0.13)          0.07)

  Sandy R. Both (early & late)      Cascade   \-             0.01 (-0.03,
                                                             0.06)

  Hood R. Early                     Gorge     \-             -0.09 (-0.14,
                                                             -0.04)

  WA Up. Gorge Tribs./White Salmon  Gorge     \-             -0.04 (-0.09,
  R. Late                                                    0.01)
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log natural spawner abundance computed
  from a linear regression applied to the smoothed natural spawner log
  abundance estimate. Only populations with at least 4 natural spawner
  estimates from 1980 to 2014 are shown and with at least 2 data points
  in the first 5 years and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

### Harvest

Lower Columbia River coho salmon are part of the Oregon Production
Index, and are harvested in ocean fisheries primarily off the coasts of
Oregon and Washington, with some harvest that historically occurred off
of the West Coast Vancouver Island (WCVI).  Canadian coho salmon
fisheries were severely restricted in the 1990s to protect upper Fraser
River coho, and have remained so ever since. Ocean fisheries off
California were closed to coho retention in 1993 and have remained
closed ever since.  Ocean fisheries for coho off of Oregon and
Washington were dramatically reduced in 1993 in response depressed
status of Oregon Coast natural coho and subsequent listing, and moved to
mark-selective fishing beginning in 1999.  Lower Columbia River coho
benefitted from the more restrictive management of ocean fisheries. 
Overall exploitation rates regularly exceeded 80% in the 1980s, but have
remained below 30% since 1993.  In addition, freshwater fisheries
impacts on naturally-produced coho salmon have been markedly reduced
through the implementation of mark-selective fisheries.  More recently,
NMFS ESA guidance for harvest of Lower Columbia River natural (LCN) coho
in marine and mainstem Columbia River fisheries is based on a matrix
describing parent escapement levels for multiple populations and the
observed Columbia River OPI smolt-to-jack survival rate. For example,
based on this matrix, the total allowable marine and mainstem Columbia
River exploitation rate for LCN coho in 2019 fisheries would be no more
than 23.0 percent (PFMC 2019).

![https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/MEVKo9i6MC9zmOPZjtgUuiaXb0eY-aQo-BGGWGquWI7E4wEHlZO7j1eYvuNn9q5VF9j0sR2ZMcmQUndYdjylBVzUuZskgHSUXAo7zPHeo-t6Fk713DiT4f9ku5UdeiAb6MAVAw](./media/media/image78.png){width="5.604166666666667in"
height="2.8229166666666665in"}

Figure . Total exploitation rate on lower Columbia River natural coho
salmon.  Data (2005-2019 ) from Table 34 of (ODFW & WDFW 2020b).

### Spatial structure and diversity

#### Hatcheries

Hatchery releases have remained relatively steady at 10--17 million
since the 2005 BRT report, with approximately 14 million coho salmon
juveniles released in 2019.  Many of the populations in the ESU contain
a substantial number of hatchery-origin spawners.  Production has been
shifted into localized areas (e.g., Youngs Bay, Big Creek, and Deep
Creek) in order to reduce the influence of hatchery fish in other nearby
populations, Scappoose and Clatskanie (Figure 63).  There were no
spawner surveys conducted in the Youngs Bay or Big Creek DIPs, but it
can be assumed that the proportion of natural spawners is very low. 
Hatchery influence is also relatively high in the Grays River, with a
recent decline in the fraction "wild" (Table 34, Figure 66).  The
influence of hatchery programs on naturally-spawning fish has been
reduced in a number of basins with the removal of marked adults at
weirs, but other basins indicate an increase in the proportion of
hatchery fish spawning naturally (Table 34), perhaps as a result of
increased hatchery releases (Figure 63).  Mass marking of
hatchery-released fish, in conjunction with expanded coho spawning
surveys, has provided more accurate estimates of hatchery straying.

![https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/yABkQ_zFD1d3RTrsca0inDlgN_GXitcpNtX2Mpf93HVDcxxsU0AnavohDiQsJ2T2Lf_ZcBH_BH-dQxpBCPTDlHVi9ge7ySSmdMafpNMMVewbwTQfEz4lUzGqls0IbH78AEEj_Q](./media/media/image79.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.4270833333333335in"}

Figure .  Annual releases of juveniles coho salmon into the Coastal
Strata of the Columbia River Coho Salmon ESU from 1995 to 2019.  All
releases were from sources within the ESU.  AGM -- Abernathy, Germany,
and Mill Creek.  Those releases of fish weighing less than 2.5 g are not
included.  Data from RMIS
([[https://www.rmis.org/]{.underline}](https://www.rmis.org/) accessed
15 April 2020).

Integrated hatchery programs have been developed in a number of basins
to limit the loss of genetic diversity.  The integrated program in the
Cowlitz River was developed for reintroductions into the upper Cowlitz
Basin.  Large scale releases of these hatchery-origin coho salmon adults
into the Upper Cowlitz, Cispus, and Tilton rivers were used to
recolonize stream habitat above the mainstem dams.  A segregated program
exists for coho salmon releases into the lower Cowlitz River.  Overall,
juvenile releases into the Cowlitz River basin were reduced some 10
years ago, but have been fairly steady since then (Figure 64).  A large
integrated program for Type N coho has been ongoing in the Lewis River
for over a decade, while the Type-S (early) coho salmon program in the
Lewis River is operated as a segregated program.  Both early and
late-run hatchery-origin coho salmon are transported above Swift Dam in
the Lewis River to reestablish production in headwater areas (PacifiCorp
2020).

Other hatchery programs in the Cascade Strata have releases less than
500,000, most operate as integrated programs, except for the Kalama
River Hatchery.  Hatchery origin spawners contribute to escapement in a
number of basins, substantially so in some basins, while the Clackamas
River, Sandy River, and Salmon Creek populations have hatchery-origin
spawner rates of less than 10% (Table 34).

![https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/7yyxggzSHsZrCvs1PJewTu8yKL3wjJWSbnT_MIQQEcRQ3ML8eVbzQw5gF2uCcupcn2E-fd1Osnv2GsKyxwE3xex-1tU4j_X2jeVXdVDuzRjXMn1Y9VhQ6zyEQuTI26tZbV1oFA](./media/media/image80.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.8125in"}

Figure .  Annual releases of juveniles coho salmon into the Cascade
Strata of the Columbia River Coho Salmon ESU from 1995 to 2019.  All
releases were from sources within the ESU.  Those releases of fish
weighing less than 2.5 g are not included.  Data from RMIS
(<https://www.rmis.org/> accessed 15 April 2020).

Releases into the Gorge Strata have remained fairly steady at slightly
over 3 million annually (Figure 65).  Natural production in this Strata
is limited and the influence of hatchery-origin fish on the spawning
grounds remains higher than in other regions (Table 34).

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/zmkqFS6-se9IzAV7bWb6v3BvaJici-B1Od3Ja2xEoumWpyIt8fWrsGIWde4C-e7SprtBLXJU1JCbve8-Mj6xQOBJx3QaqBGEXhUK5s6dGr90RatDd435MtYmuDx0PXAXetPt4w](./media/media/image81.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.3125in"}

Figure . Annual releases of juveniles coho salmon into the Gorge Strata
of the Columbia River Coho Salmon ESU from 1995 to 2019.  Upper Gorge
Releases included those from the Little White Salmon NFH and Klickitat
Hatchery.  All releases were from sources within the ESU.  Those
releases of fish weighing less than 2.5 g are not included.  Data from
RMIS ([[https://www.rmis.org/]{.underline}](https://www.rmis.org/)
accessed 15 April 2020).

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ---------------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Grays/Chinook R. Late        \-          \-          \-          0.37        0.27

  Elochoman R. Late            \-          \-          \-          0.53        0.65

  Clatskanie R. Late           \-          0.93        0.97        0.94        0.76

  Mill/Abernathy/Germany Cr.   \-          \-          \-          0.89        0.89
  Late                                                                         

  Scappoose R. Late            \-          0.94        0.99        1.00        0.99

  Lower Cowlitz R. Late        \-          \-          \-          0.88        0.85

  Coweeman R. Late             \-          \-          \-          0.91        0.89

  NF Toutle R. (early & late)  \-          \-          \-          0.70        0.56

  SF Toutle R. (early & late)  \-          \-          \-          0.84        0.79

  Upper Cowlitz R. (early &    0.73        0.13        0.26        0.20        0.23
  late)                                                                        

  Tilton R. (early & late)     0.64        0.07        0.29        0.38        0.48

  Kalama R. Late               \-          \-          \-          0.07        0.27

  NF Lewis R. (early & late)   \-          \-          \-          0.60        0.22

  EF Lewis R. (early & late)   \-          \-          \-          0.87        0.68

  Salmon Cr. Late              \-          \-          \-          0.98        0.94

  Clackamas R. (early & late)  0.65        0.67        0.64        0.88        0.90

  Sandy R. (early & late)      \-          \-          0.94        0.92        0.96

  Washougal R. Late            \-          \-          \-          0.68        0.25

  WA Up. Gorge Tribs./White    \-          \-          0.73        0.74        0.76
  Salmon R. Late                                                               

  Hood R. Early                \-          0.40        0.58        0.25        0.48
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year mean of fraction natural-origin spawner (NOS) (sum
  of all estimates divided by the number of estimates) in Lower Columbia
  River chum salmon populations. "-" indicates that no estimate
  available for that 5-year range. 

![](./media/media/image82.tiff){width="5.396701662292213in"
height="6.984000437445319in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in the estimated fraction of the natural
spawning Lower Columbia River coho salmon population consisting of fish
of natural origin.  Points show the annual raw estimates, where
available.

#### Spatial Structure

There have been a number of large-scale efforts to improve
accessibility, one of the primary metrics for spatial structure, in this
ESU.  On the Hood River, Powerdale Dam was removed in 2010 and while
this dam previously provided fish passage removal of the dam is thought
to eliminate passage delays and injuries.  Condit Dam, on the White
Salmon River, was removed in 2011 and this provided access to previously
inaccessible habitat.  Current monitoring is limited, but screw trap
results indicate that coho salmon are successfully spawning in the White
Salmon River (Jezorek & Hardiman 2018).  Fish passage operations (trap
and haul) were begun on the Lewis River in 2012, reestablishing access
to historically-occupied habitat above Swift Dam (RKm 77.1), juvenile
passage efficiencies were initially poor, but have improved considerably
with the 2019 juvenile collection rate estimated at 64% (PacifiCorp and
PUDCC 2020).  Nearly 150,000 juvenile coho salmon were produced and
collected from the upper North Fork Lewis River.  Similarly, efforts to
provide downstream juvenile passage at the Cowlitz Dam complex
collection sites began in the 1990s, and since that time there have been
a number of modifications in the facilities at Cowlitz Falls Dam. 
Juvenile collection efficiency for coho salmon at the Cowlitz Falls
facility was in 2019 was 90.4% (Rubenson et al. 2019).  Coho salmon from
the Tilton River are collected separately at Mayfield Dam.  A trap and
haul program also currently maintains access to the North Toutle River
above the sediment retention structure (SRS), with coho salmon and
steelhead being passed above the dam (Liedtke *et al.* 2013).  This SRS
transportation program relocates coho salmon into the North Fork Toutle
DIP; however, there are limited release sites and only a portion of the
upper watershed is accessible.  Fish access to the upper Clackamas Basin
continues to improve, with recent (2019) estimates for fish guidance
efficiency of 94.1% at the North Fork Dam (Ackerman & Pyper 2020a).  
Improvements in juvenile collection on the Clackamas River at Portland
General Electric projects, with nearly 200,000 juvenile coho salmon
collected annually, are likely to result in increased abundances in the
future under more productive ocean conditions.  On a more general basis,
there have been a number of actions throughout the ESU to remove or
improve culverts and other small-scale passage barrier.

There have been incremental improvements in spatial structure during
this review period.  Poor ocean and freshwater conditions have been such
as to mask any benefits from these activities.  Similarly, improvements
in fish passage at culverts has improved improved with 132 km (79 miles)
of stream habitat being opened up in Washington State alone since 2015
(LCFRB 2020), but there are a large number of small-scale fish barriers
that remain to be upgraded or removed.

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

In contrast to the previous status review update, which occurred at a
time of near record returns for several populations, the ESU abundance
has declined during the last five years.  Only 6 of the 23 populations
for which we have data appear to be above their recovery goals (Table
35).  This includes the Youngs Bay DIP and Big Creek DIP, which have
very low recovery goals, and the Salmon Creek DIP and Tilton River DIP,
which were not assigned goals but have relatively high abundances.  Of
the remaining DIPs in the ESU, 3 DIPs are at 50-99% of their recovery
goals, 7 DIPs are at 10-50% of their recovery goals, and 7 populations
are at less than 10% of their recovery goals (this includes the Lower
Gorge DIP for which there are no data, but it is assumed that the
abundance is low).  Hatchery production has been relatively stable and
the proportion of hatchery-origin fish on the spawning grounds has
increased for some populations and decreased for others.  The transition
from segregated hatchery programs to integrated local broodstock
programs should reduce the risks from domestication and non-native
introgression.  Spatial structure has improved incrementally, with
improved passage programs at several major dams.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Abundance    
  --------- ----------------------------------- ------------ -------------
  Stratum   Population                          2015-2019    Target

  Coast     Grays/Chinook River (WA)            212          2,400

            Youngs Bay (OR)                     \(14\)       7

            Big Creek (OR)                      \(122\)      12

            Elochoman/Skamokawa (WA)            558          2,400

            Clatskanie River (OR)               199          3,201

            Mill/Abernathy/Germany Cr (WA)      685          1,800

            Scappoose Cr (OR)                   448          3,208

  Cascade   Lower Cowlitz River (WA)            2,622        3,700

            Coweeman River (WA)                 1,987        1,200

            NF Toutle River (WA)                819          1,900

            SF Toutle River (WA)                1,075        1,900

            Upper Cowlitz River (WA)            631          2,000

            Cispus River (WA)                   NA           2,000

            Tilton River (WA)                   1,932        NA

            Kalama River (WA)                   43           500

            NF Lewis River (WA)                 1,275        500

            EF Lewis River (WA)                 686          2,000

            Salmon Cr (WA)                      1,546        NA

            Clackamas River (OR)                2,889        11,232

            Sandy River (OR)                    854          5,685

            Washougal River (WA)                174          1,500

  Gorge     Lower Gorge (WA & OR)               NA           1.900

            Upper Gorge/White Salmon River (WA) 45           1,900

            Upper Gorge/Hood River (OR)         29           5.162
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Current five-year geometric mean of raw natural-origin
  spawner abundances and recovery targets (Dornbush 2013) for Lower
  Columbia River chum salmon demographically independent populations
  (DIPs).  Numbers in () represent total (hatchery + origin) spawners. 
  Colors indicate the relative proportion of the recovery target
  currently obtained: red (\<10%), orange (10%\>x\<50%), yellow
  (50%\>x\<100%), green (\>100%).

### Updated biological risk summary

Overall, the Lower Columbia River Coho Salmon ESU is at a slightly
increased risk of extinction than during the previous period.  Natural
spawner and total abundances have decreased in almost all DIPs (Figure
60), and Coastal and Gorge Strata populations are all at low levels with
significant numbers of hatchery-origin coho salmon on the spawning
grounds.  Improvements in Diversity and Spatial Structure have been
slight and overshadowed by declines in Abundances and Productivity.  In
light of the poor ocean and freshwater conditions that occurred during
much of this recent review period, it should be noted that some of the
populations exhibited resilience and only experienced relatively small
declines in abundance (Figure 60).  Some populations were exhibiting
positive productivity trends during the last year of review,
representing the return of the progeny from the 2016 adult return
(Figure 61).  For individual populations, the risk of extinction spans
the full range from low to very high.  The ESU likely remains at
moderate risk.

## Lower Columbia River steelhead DPS

### Brief description of DPS

The DPS includes all naturally spawned anadromous *O. mykiss*
(steelhead) populations below natural and manmade impassable barriers in
streams and tributaries to the Columbia River between the Cowlitz and
Wind Rivers, Washington (inclusive), and the lower Willamette and Hood
rivers, Oregon (inclusive), as well as multiple artificial propagation
programs (85 FR 81822).  Myers *et al*. (2006) identified 23 DIPs,
including 6 summer-run steelhead populations and 17 winter-run
populations (Figure 67).

![](./media/media/image83.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Map of 23 winter and summer-run steelhead demographically
independent populations (DIPs) in the Lower Columbia River steelhead
DPS.  The DPS is separated into two major population groups (MPGs):
Cascade and Gorge. Areas that are accessible (green), accessible only
via trap and haul programs (yellow), or blocked (cross-hatched) are
indicated accordingly.

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2005*

In 2005, a large majority (73%) of the BRT votes for this ESU fell in
the "likely to become endangered" category, with small minorities
falling in the "in danger of extinction" and "not likely to become
endangered" categories (Good *et al*. 2005). The BRT found moderate
risks in all the VSP categories.  All of the major risk factors
identified by previous BRTs still remained.  Most populations were at
relatively low abundance, and those with adequate data for modeling were
estimated to have a relatively high extinction probability.  Some
populations, particularly summer run, had higher returns in the most
recent years included in the 2005 report (years 2001 and 2002).  The
WLC-TRT (Myers *et al.* 2006) estimated that at least four historical
populations were extirpated. The hatchery contribution to natural
spawning remained high in many populations.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) summarized three status evaluations of LCR
steelhead status, all based on WLC-TRT criteria, which had been
conducted since the last BRT status update in 2005.  All three
evaluations concluded that the ESU was currently at high risk of
extinction.  Of the 26 historical populations in the ESU, 17 were
considered at high or very high risk. Populations in the upper Lewis,
Cowlitz and White Salmon watersheds remained cut-off from access to
essential spawning habitat by hydroelectric dams. Projects to
reestablish access had been initiated in the Cowlitz and Lewis systems
but these have not yet produced self-sustaining populations. The
populations generally remained at relatively low abundances with low
productivity.  Overall, the information considered did not indicate a
change in the biological risk category since the time of the 2005 BRT
status review.

*2015*

The 2015 status review update (NWFSC 2015) found that the majority of
winter-run steelhead DIPs in this DPS continue to persist, but at low
abundances.  Hatchery interactions remained a concern in select basins,
but the overall situation had somewhat improved compared to prior
reviews.  Summer-run steelhead DIPs were similarly stable, albeit at low
abundance levels.  The decline in the Wind River summer-run DIP was a
source of concern, given that this population has been considered one of
the healthiest of the summer-runs in the DPS.  Passage programs in the
Cowlitz and Lewis basins were noted to have the "potential" to provide
considerable improvements in abundance and spatial structure, but had
not produced self-sustaining populations.  Low abundances winter-run
returns to the Upper Cowlitz River were considered anomalous, related
more to the development of an integrated hatchery broodstock and
temporary modifications at the Cowlitz Falls Dam to benefit Chinook
salmon than to a decline in viability.  Efforts to provide passage above
North Fork Lewis River dams offered the opportunity for substantial
improvements in the winter run steelhead population and an opportunity
to reestablish summer-run steelhead, but juvenile collection
efficiencies were not sufficient to establish viable populations. 
Habitat degradation continued to be a concern for most populations. 
Even with modest improvements in the status of several winter-run DIPs,
none of the populations was evaluated to be at fully viable status, and
similarly none of the MPGs met the criteria for viability.  The DPS
continued to be at moderate risk.

### Description of new data available for this review

For most of the populations in this DPS abundance estimates for
winter-run steelhead were calculated by expanding redd counts from index
and census surveys and for summer-run steelhead a mark-resight survey of
adult during prespawn holding is employed (Rawding & Rodgers 2013).  In
many cases, river conditions limit access and visibility during winter
steelhead spawning creating some uncertainty in the expansion of total
spawner abundance.  Where tributaries contained dams or other
collection/passage structures, abundance and hatchery proportions were
estimated by direct adult counts, or a combination of redd surveys and
dam counts.  Weirs were operated in some tributaries to count adults and
remove or exclude hatchery-origin adults.  Where dams have been removed,
as in the Sandy River, spawner surveys have been expanded on tributaries
to provide census data; whereas in the case of Powerdale Dam limited
surveys provide a partial picture of population status for
winter-steelhead, with weirs on the East Fork Hood River and Neal Creek
(West Fork Hood River) providing information on summer-run abundance
(Simpson 2020).

### Abundance and productivity

#### Winter-run Western Cascade MPG

This MPG includes native winter-run steelhead in 14 DIPs from the
Cowlitz River to the Washougal River, inclusive (Figure 67); however,
abundances are only available for 10 DIPs.  Of the 10 populations, 7
exhibited an increase in 5-year geometric means, 2 exhibited a decrease,
and one remains unchanged (Table 36).  There is some uncertainty in
these abundances given that 6 of the 10 data sets do not distinguish
between natural and hatchery-origin spawners.  The North Fork Toutle
River is currently maintained as a wild steelhead gene bank by WDFW
(NMFS 2017a), and it may be assumed that the majority of spawners are of
natural origin.  For most populations, total abundances and
natural-origin abundances (where available) have remained low, averaging
in the hundreds of fish.  Notable exceptions to this were the Clackamas
River and Sandy River winter-run steelhead populations. The Sandy River
winter steelhead population experienced a 186% increase in abundance,
with a current five-year geomean of 3,615 (Table 36) while maintaining
low levels of hatchery-origin steelhead on the spawning grounds (Figure
68).  The Clackamas River winter steelhead run was stable, with a
five-year geomean of 2,819 (Table 36). Hatchery fish are removed from
these rivers at hatchery weirs, in stream weirs, and at North Fork Dam
(Whitman *et al.* 2017).  Comparisons of geometric means; however, do
not reflect the variation within review periods.  There is a strong
cyclical pattern in most populations with a peak in abundance in 2014
and 2015.  For most winter-run populations in this MPG the trend within
the 2015 to 2019 period is strongly negative as expressed in annual
productivity estimates (Figure 69).  There is some concern that this
downward trend may be indicative of something more systemic other than
short-term freshwater or oceanic conditions.

#### Summer-run Cascade MPG

There are four summer-run steelhead DIPs in the MPG: Kalama River, North
Fork Lewis River, East Fork Lewis River, and Washougal River (Figure
67).  Of these, two populations (EF Lewis River and Washougal River)
have exhibited declines in abundance, and one (Kalama River) has
exhibited abundance increase.  Abundance estimates did not distinguish
between hatchery-origin and natural-origin spawners; therefore there is
some uncertainty in the applicability of these trends to the natural
population.  Summer-run steelhead programs (using non-native Skamania
Hatchery origin broodstock) have been ongoing in both the Kalama and
Washougal basins.  The East Fork Lewis River is currently maintained as
a wild steelhead gene bank by WDFW (NMFS 2017), and it may be assumed
that the majority of spawners (five-year geomean of 650) are
predominately of natural origin.  As with the Cascade winter-run
steelhead DIPs, there has been considerable annual variability in
abundance during the 2015-2019 interval, and the current within census
period trend is strongly downward.  The North Fork Lewis River is
blocked by a series of impassable dams, and although a trap and haul
program has been initiated summer-run are not currently being considered
as part of the reintroduction program.  There is some uncertainty
regarding the status of this population, specifically if residualized
*O. mykiss* contain a genetic legacy of the historical population and if
they are capable of reinitiating an anadromous life-history.  The
recovery of summer run steelhead in the Elwha River apparently by
resident *O.* mykiss suggests a summer run could be reestablished. 
Although the changes in 5-year abundances are not substantial, recent
negative trends are of concern.  Whether this is a portent of long term
changing oceanic conditions is not clear, but is of some concern
regardless of its cause.

![](./media/media/image84.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="6.117361111111111in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

![https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/qaI0V-ngbwKeEf5s73UmyCtEYaA6QhCOnn7LuSXHogWZXDkklDl1qEzoiJIRh3FBoFm2OfMDRE5M9dpkJr6w5aldIhJ0h3vr_wC1z3ORxn1wvgzs7vlhIEimaEqzYFHIdXcUjg](./media/media/image85.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.53125in"}

Figure . Trends in productivity for demographically independent
populations (DIPs) in Lower Columbia River steelhead DPS, estimated as
the log of the smoothed natural spawning abundance in year t  - smoothed
natural spawning abundance in year (t -- 4).

#### Winter-run Gorge MPG

This MPG contain three DIPs, Lower Gorge, Upper Gorge, and Hood River. 
In both the Lower and Upper Gorge populations surveys for winter
steelhead are very limited.  Abundance levels appear to be improving in
the Hood River with a 109% increase in abundance over the previous
review period and a five-year geomean of 651 (Table 36).  The
development of an integrated hatchery program, in addition to improved
access following the removal of Powerdale Dam, may have facilitated the
improvement in the Hood River winter run.

#### Summer-run Gorge MPG

The Wind River and Hood River are the two DIPs in this summer run MPG. 
Hood River summer-run steelhead monitoring has been problematic since
the removal of Powerdale Dam.  Adult abundance in the Wind River has
declined since the last review and trending downward (Table 36, Figure
68).  Recent five-year abundance for Wind River summer run, a designated
wild steelhead gene bank, is 627, a 13% decline from the 2010-2014
average (Table 36, Figure 68).  The long-term (2005-2019) abundance
trend for the Wind River is a 2% annual decline.  Given the presence of
only two summer-run DIPs in this MPG and the recent downward trend, the
overall status of the MPG is uncertain.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population   MPG       1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                 Change
  ------------ --------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Coweeman R.  Cascade W \(436\)     \(218\)     \(458\)     \(470\)     \(443\)     \(528\)     \(19\)
  W                                                                                              

  NF Toutle R. Cascade W                                     \(449\)     \(295\)     \(409\)     \(39\)
  W                                                                                              

  SF Toutle R. Cascade W \(928\)     \(344\)     \(725\)     \(521\)     \(432\)     \(660\)     \(53\)
  W                                                                                              

  Up. Cowlitz  Cascade W             \(82\)      \(1242\)    \(1273\)    168 (458)   199 (443)   18 (-3)
  R. W                                                                                           

  Tilton R. W  Cascade W                         \(975\)     \(343\)     268 (268)   241 (309)   -10 (15)

  Kalama R. W  Cascade W \(931\)     \(654\)     \(1443\)    \(1219\)    \(866\)     \(618\)     (-29)

  EF Lewis R.  Cascade W \(85\)      \(214\)     \(525\)     \(453\)     \(356\)     \(613\)     \(72\)
  W                                                                                              

  Clackamas R. Cascade W 1594 (2189) 487 (733)   1371 (1817) 1186 (1599) 2827 (2954) 2819 (3066) 0 (4)
  W                                                                                              

  Sandy R. W   Cascade W                                                 1263 (1376) 3615 (3858) 186
                                                                                                 (180)

  Washougal R. Cascade W \(132\)     \(182\)     \(479\)     \(504\)     \(328\)     \(427\)     \(30\)
  W                                                                                              

  Kalama R. Su Cascade   \(1060\)    \(454\)     \(382\)     \(338\)     \(519\)     \(561\)     \(8\)
               Su                                                                                

  EF Lewis R.  Cascade               \(170\)     \(402\)     \(539\)     \(849\)     \(650\)     (-23)
  Su           Su                                                                                

  Washougal R. Cascade   \(220\)     \(131\)     \(282\)     \(612\)     \(712\)     \(644\)     (-10)
  Su           Su                                                                                

  Wind R. W    Gorge W                           \(33\)      \(16\)      \(17\)      \(9\)       (-47)

  Hood R. W    Gorge W                                                   311 (900)   650 (1108)  109 (23)

  Wind R. Su   Gorge Su  \(563\)     \(454\)     592 (598)   651 (655)   724 (727)   627 (631)   -13
                                                                                                 (-13)
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year geometric mean of raw wild spawner counts. This is
  the raw total spawner count times the fraction wild estimate, if
  available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total spawner
  counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that a total
  spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of wild
  spawners available. The geometric mean was computed as the product of
  counts raised to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to
  5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean.
  Percent change between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on
  the far right.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population         MPG           1990-2005           2004-2019
  ------------------ ------------- ------------------- -------------------
  Clackamas R. W     Cascade W     0.01 (-0.07, 0.09)  0.06 (0.02, 0.09)

  Wind R. Su         Gorge Su                          -0.02 (-0.05, 0.01)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table .  15-year trends in log natural spawner abundance computed
  from a linear regression applied to the smoothed natural spawner log
  abundance estimate. Only populations with at least 4 natural spawner
  estimates from 1980 to 2014 are shown and with at least 2 data points
  in the first 5 years and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

### Harvest

Steelhead from this DPS[ ]{.underline}are also intercepted in mainstem
and tributary fisheries targeting non-listed hatchery and
naturally-produced salmon, and hatchery steelhead. Mark-selective
commercial tangle net fisheries in the mainstem Columbia River occur
during the winter/spring time frame and primarily affect wild winter
steelhead.  Winter steelhead harvest in the mainstem from 2015-2019 have
averaged 96 fish annually, primarily from unclipped releases, with an
annual rate of 0.3% (ODFW & WDFW 2020a).  Similarly, mortalities for
unclipped summer-run fish in the Lower Columbia River mainstem fisheries
averaged 49 fish/year, with mortality rates for unclipped summer-run
steelhead of 0.5% in fisheries below Bonneville Dam and 0.01% in the
Bonneville Pool.  Recreational fisheries targeting marked
hatchery-origin steelhead encounter natural-origin fish at a relatively
high rate, but hooking mortality rates are generally lower than release
mortality rates in the commercial fisheries (ODFW & WDFW 2020a).

Recreational harvest of marked hatchery-origin steelhead occurs in most
basins and it is likely that non-retention hooking mortality affects
most populations in the Lower Columbia River DPS, but that the encounter
rate and total mortality are relatively minor.

### Hatcheries

Total steelhead hatchery releases in the Lower Columbia River Steelhead
DPS have decreased slightly since the last status review, declining from
an average annual release (summer and winter run) of 3 million smolts
annually to 2.75 million (Figure 70, Figure 71, Figure 72).  Some
populations continue to have relatively high fractions of
hatchery-origin spawners, whereas others have relatively few
hatchery-origin spawners (Table 38), although data for many populations
is not available. WDFW is currently developing a new methodology for
assess the hatchery contribution to naturally spawning steelhead.  In
addition, the North Fork Toutle River, East Fork Lewis River, and Wind
River have been established by WDFW as wild gene banks.  One of the
major changes in hatchery operations was the elimination of the
out-of-DPS steelhead broodstock programs in the Kalama River. 
Previously, out-of-DPS releases were terminated in the Cowlitz and East
Fork Lewis rivers (NWFSC 2015).  Out-of-DPS release continue in the
Clackamas River, Sandy River, South Fork Toutle River, and Washougal
River with the release of Skamania Hatchery summer run steelhead.  Where
hatcheries maintain multiple stocks of steelhead there continues to be
some risk of hybridization between different run times or native and
out-of-DPS stocks.  

There are a number of methods employed to further reduce the incidence
of hatchery-origin fish spawning naturally.  Where adults are handled in
census (complete capture) upstream passage programs (e.g., Clackamas
River, Cowlitz River, Kalama River winter run, and Lewis River)
hatchery-origin fish are often removed from the river or recycled for
additional harvest opportunities.  In some cases Kalama River
hatchery-origin summer-run steelhead are able to ascend the Falls and
avoid being captured and removed at the fish ladder.  In addition
mark-selective recreational fisheries remove some number of
hatchery-origin fish from the rivers.  Over the years, these actions
have incrementally reduced the pHOS form many populations.

In the Cascade winter-run MPG hatchery releases have remained fairly
consistent, with the majority of releases in the Cowlitz Basin (Figure
70).  Releases of winter-run steelhead by specific programs into Cowlitz
River tributaries have been combined, with distinct programs in the
Coweeman, South Fork Toutle, North Fork Toutle, Lower Cowlitz, Tilton,
and Upper Cowlitz and Cispus rivers.  Recent changes in hatchery
operations from isolated programs with non-native broodstocks to
programs with locally-sourced broodstock that continue to integrate
natural-origin fish into the broodstock represent a major effort to
decrease the domestication risk from hatchery programs.

Figure . Annual releases of winter-run juvenile steelhead into the
Cascade Strata of the Lower Columbia River DPS from 1995-2019.  Data
from RMIS ([[http://www.rmpc.org/]{.underline}](http://www.rmpc.org/)
accessed 16 March 2020).

Hatchery releases in the Cascade summer-run MPG have remained fairly
steady at 1.3 million fish annually (Figure 70).  The majority of these
releases are from hatcheries using the out-of-DPS Skamania Hatchery
summer-run broodstock, with the exception of the Kalama River integrated
summer-run steelhead program.  In addition, many of the basins where
these fish are released did not historically have summer-run
populations, most notably in Cowlitz Basin populations, Clackamas River
DIP, and Sandy River DIP (Myers *et al*. 2006).  The potential effects
of these summer-run releases into non-native waters through
introgression and competition has been discussed in a number of studies
(Kostow & Zhou 2006; Johnson *et al.* 2018).

Figure . Annual releases of summer-run juvenile steelhead into the
Cascade Strata of the Lower Columbia River DPS from 1995-2019.  Data
from RMIS ([[http://www.rmpc.org/]{.underline}](http://www.rmpc.org/)
accessed 16 March 2020).

There have been limited releases of steelhead into the winter and
summer-run Gorge MPGs (Figure 72), with the predominant program being
the integrated winter-run steelhead program in the Hood River.  The Wind
River, the other major tributary in this area is designated as a Wild
Gene Bank, with minimal hatchery influence.  

Figure . Annual releases of juvenile steelhead into the Gorge Strata of
the Lower Columbia River DPS, by run timing, from 1995-2019.  Data from
RMIS ([[http://www.rmpc.org/]{.underline}](http://www.rmpc.org/)
accessed 16 March 2020).

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population         1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ------------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Tilton R. Winter   \-          \-          \-          1.00        0.79

  Up. Cowlitz R.     \-          \-          \-          0.70        0.49
  Winter                                                             

  Clackamas R.       0.67        0.76        0.75        0.96        0.92
  Winter                                                             

  Sandy R. Winter    \-          \-          \-          0.92        0.94

  Hood R. Winter     \-          \-          \-          0.37        0.61

  Wind R. Summer     \-          \-          \-          \-          \-
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year mean of fraction natural-origin Chinook salmon
  spawning naturally in the Willamette River Chinook Salmon ESU (sum of
  all estimates divided by the number of estimates). Blanks (-) mean no
  estimate available in that 5-year range.

### Spatial Structure

There have been a number of large-scale efforts to improve accessibility
(one of the primary metrics for spatial structure) in this ESU.  Efforts
to provide access to the Upper Cowlitz Basin (Upper Cowlitz, Cispus, and
Tilton Rivers) began in 1996 with the initiation of juvenile collection
at Cowlitz Falls Dam.  There have been a number of structural and
operational changes at the Cowlitz Falls Dam, most recently in 2017, to
improve collection efficiency ((Serl & Morrill 2010; Serl *et al.*
2014), Rubenson et al. 2019).  In a recent study, fish collection
efficiency (FCE) for steelhead juveniles averaged 81.3% with fish
passage survival being 83.3% for the fish collected (Rubenson et al.
2019).  The collection of steelhead kelts remains another area where
further improvement is needed.  Trap and haul operations began on the
Lewis River in 2012 for winter-run steelhead, reestablishing access to
historically-occupied habitat above Swift Dam (RKm 77.1).  In the North
Fork Lewis River for 2019 the FCE for steelhead collected at the Swift
Reservoir Floating Collector was estimated at 27% (PacifiCorp and PUDCC
2020).  In the Clackamas River, fish guidance efficiencies for steelhead
juveniles at the North Fork Dam were estimated in 2018 at 94.3% under
non-spill conditions and 71.7% under with spill (Ackerman and Pyper
2019).  Juvenile collection in the Clackamas River occurs at River Mill
and North Fork Dams, with a combined project collection efficiency of
over 95% in 2016-2018 (Ackerman & Pyper 2020b).

Environmental variability may make it difficult to assess the effects of
changes in spatial structure, except through longer term data sets. 
These include the removal of Marmot Dam in 2007 and the Little Sandy
River diversion dam in 2008, and Hemlock Dam on Trout Creek (wind River)
in 2009.  Additionally, beginning in 2010, unmarked steelhead have been
passed above the hatchery weir on Cedar Creek, a tributary to the Sandy
River.  Powerdale Dam was removed in 2010 and while this dam previously
provided for fish passage, removal of the dam is thought to eliminate
passage delays and injuries.  Finally, there has been a trap and haul
operation at the sediment retention structure (SRS) on the North Fork
Toutle River since 1989.  Transportation above the SRS is limited to two
small tributaries and only a small proportion of the upper basin is
utilized (LCFRB 2020).  In addition, there have been numerous recovery
actions throughout recovery actions throughout the ESU to remove or
improve the thousands of culverts and other small-scale passage
barriers.  

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

Of the 23 DIPs in the Lower Columbia River steelhead DPS, 10 are
nominally at or above the goals set in the recovery plan (Dornbush and
Sihler 2013); however, it should be noted that many of these abundance
estimates do not distinguish between natural and hatchery-origin
spawners. Notable is the winter-run DIP in the Sandy River, designated a
"primary population" in the recovery plan, and which is well above its
recovery target.  Six other primary populations are just above their
recovery goal, and as mentioned above many of the abundance estimates do
not distinguish between hatchery and natural origin adults.  One
population, the Wind River summer-run DIP is at \>50% of its recovery
goal, with the remaining 12 DIPs at less than 50% of their recovery
goals.  Of those 12 DIPs, abundance data for 6 DIPs were insufficient
for statistical analysis, but presumed to be of low abundance, and one
DIP being part of the Upper Cowlitz River/Cispus River combined data
set.  Both summer and winter-run MPGs in the Gorge were well below
recovery goals.  Although the situation in the Cascade Stratum is
better, improvements in fish passage/collection need to be realized in
the Upper Cowlitz, North Fork Toutle, and North Fork Lewis rivers to
achieve recovery goals.

While there have been improvements in diversity through hatchery reform,
especially the elimination of non-native Chambers Creek winter-run
broodstock and some Skamania Hatchery-origin broodstock.  Population
specific data on hatchery contribution to the naturally-spawning
populations is not available for most DIPs, and diversity criteria
cannot be properly evaluated without it.  Spatial structure remains a
concern, especially for those populations that rely on adult trap and
haul programs and juvenile downstream passage structures for
sustainability.  

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Abundance      
  ----------- ---------------------------------- -------------- ----------
  Stratum     Population                         2015-2019      Target

  Cascade     Lower Cowlitz River (WA) W         NA             400

              Coweeman River (WA) W              \(528\)        500

              NF Toutle River (WA) W             \(409\)        600

              SF Toutle River (WA) W             \(660\)        600

              Upper Cowlitz River (WA) W         199            500

              Cispus River (WA) W                NA             500

              Tilton River (WA) W                241            200

              Kalama River (WA) W                \(618\)        600

              NF Lewis River (WA) W              NA[^4]         400

              EF Lewis River (WA) W              \(613\)        500

              Salmon Cr (WA) W                   NA             NA

              Clackamas River (OR) W             2,819          10,671

              Sandy River (OR) W                 3,615          1,519

              Kalama River (WA) Su               \(560\)        500

              NF Lewis River (WA) Su             NA             500

              EF Lewis River (WA) Su             \(650\)        500

              Washougal River (WA) Su            \(644\)        500

              Washougal River (WA) W             \(427\)        350

  Gorge       Lower Gorge (WA & OR) W            NA             300

              Upper Gorge (Wind R)  (WA) W       \(9\)          NA

              Hood River (OR) W                  650            2,079

              Wind River (WA) Su                 627            1,000

              Hood River (OR) Su                 NA             2,008
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table .  Current 5-year geometric mean of raw natural-origin spawner
  abundances and one recovery scenario presented in the Recovery Plan
  (NMFS 2011) for Upper Willamette River spring-run Chinook salmon
  demographically independent populations (DIPs).  Colors indicate the
  relative proportion of the recovery target currently obtained: red
  (\<10%), orange (10%\>x\<50%), yellow (50%\>x\<100%), green (\>100%).

### Updated biological risk summary

The majority of winter-run steelhead DIPs in this DPS continue to
persist at low abundance levels (100s of fish), with the exception of
the Clackamas and Sandy River DIPs, which have abundances in the low
1,000s.  Although the five-year geometric abundance means are near
recovery plan goals for many populations, the recent trends are
negative.  Summer-run steelhead DIPs were similarly stable, but also at
low abundance levels.  Summer-run DIPs in the Kalama, East Fork Lewis,
and Washougal River DIPs are near their recovery plan goals; however, it
is unclear how hatchery-origin fish contribute to this abundance.  The
decline in the Wind River summer-run DIP is a source of concern, given
that this population has been considered one of the healthiest of the
summer-runs.  It is not clear whether the declines observed represent a
short-term oceanic cycle, longer-term climatic change, or other
systematic issues.  While other species in the Lower Columbia River have
a coastal-oriented distribution, steelhead are wide ranging and it is
more difficult to predict the effects of changes in ocean productivity. 
Alternatively, most steelhead juveniles remain in freshwater for two
years prior to emigration, making them more susceptible to climatic
changes in temperature and precipitation. 

Spatial structure and abundances are limited due to migrational
blockages in the Cowlitz and Lewis River basins.  The efficiency of
adult passage and juvenile collection programs remain an issue.  Recent
studies indicate that there have been improvements in juvenile
collection efficiency in the Cowlitz River, but these have not been
reflected yet in adult abundance.  The juvenile collection facilities in
the Clackamas River at North Fork Dam appears to be successful enough to
support increases in abundance.  Hatchery interactions remain a concern
in select basins, but the overall situation is somewhat improved
compared to prior reviews.  It is not possible to determine the risk
status of this DPS given the uncertainty in abundance estimates for
nearly half of the DIPs.  Additionally, nearly all of the DIPs for which
there is abundance data are exhibiting a negative a abundance trend in
2018 and 2019.  

Although a number of DIPs exhibited increases in their 5-year geometric
mean, others still remain depressed, and neither the winter and
summer-run MPGs are near viability in the Gorge.  Given these concerns
the DPS therefore is consider to be at moderate risk.[\
]{.smallcaps}

## Columbia River chum salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU

The ESU includes all naturally spawned populations of chum salmon
(*Oncorhynchus keta*) in the Columbia River and its tributaries in
Washington and Oregon, as well as several artificial propagation
programs (85 FR 81822, Figure 73)  This ESU is divided into three major
population groups (MPGs) with a total of 17 demographically independent
populations (DIPs).

![](./media/media/image86.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Map of the Lower Columbia River chum salmon ESU's spawning and
rearing areas, illustrating all 17 demographically independent
populations (DIPs) and the 3 major population groups (MPGs).  Note that
population 8, Cowlitz River, contains two DIPs: fall run and a summer
run.

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2005*

In the 2005 status review (Good *et al*. 2005), nearly all votes for the
Columbia River chum salmon ESU fell in the "likely to become endangered"
(63%) or "in danger of extinction" (34%) categories. The BRT had
substantial concerns about every VSP element.  Most or all risk factors
the BRT previously identified (Johnson et al. 1997) remained important
concerns. The WLC-TRT estimated that close to 90% of this ESU's
historical populations were extinct or nearly so, resulting in loss of
much diversity and connectivity between populations. The 2005 BRT was
concerned that populations that remained were small, and overall
abundance for the ESU was low. The ESU had shown low productivity for
many decades. The BRT was encouraged that unofficial reports for 2002
suggested a large increase in abundance in some (perhaps many)
locations, but it was not determined whether this represented a
temporary climate-driven improvement or the beginning of a long term
reestablishment of populations.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) concluded that the vast majority (14 out of 17)
chum populations remain extirpated or nearly so. The Grays River and
Lower Gorge populations exhibited a sharp increase in abundance in 2002,
but then declined back to relatively low abundance levels in the range
of variation observed over the prior several decades. Chinook and coho
populations in the Lower Columbia and Willamette showed similar
increases in the early 2000's followed by declines, suggesting the
increase in chum salmon abundance was related to ocean conditions.
Overall, the new information considered in 2010 did not indicate a
change in the biological risk category since the time of the last BRT
status review in 2005 was warranted.

*2015*

NWFSC (2015) found that the majority of the populations in this ESU were
at high to very high risk, with very low abundances.  These populations
were at risk of extirpation due to demographic stochasticity and Allee
effects.  One population, Grays River, was estimated to be at low risk,
with spawner abundances in the thousands and demonstrating a recent
positive trend.  The Washougal River and Lower Gorge populations
maintained moderate numbers of spawners and appeared to be relatively
stable.  The life history of chum salmon is such that ocean conditions
have a strong influence on the survival of emigrating juveniles.  At
that time, the potential prospect of poor ocean conditions for the near
future was considered a major risk that would put further pressure on
these chum salmon populations. 

Freshwater habitat conditions were thought to be negatively influencing
the spawning and early rearing success in some basins and contributing
to the overall low productivity of the ESU.  Land development,
especially in the low gradient reaches that chum salmon prefer,
continues to be a threat to most chum populations due to projected
increases in the population of the greater Vancouver-Portland area and
the Lower Columbia River overall (Metro 2014).  The overall viability of
this ESU was considered to be relatively unchanged since 2010 and the
modest improvements in some populations did not warrant a change in risk
category, especially given the uncertainty regarding climatic effects in
the near future.  This ESU therefore remained at moderate to high risk.

### Description of new data available for this review

In general, most tributaries are surveyed by foot, although chum salmon
observations may be incidental to surveys focusing on Chinook or coho
salmon (especially late-run coho salmon).  Standardized mark-recapture
surveys have been undertaken and population estimates are available for
the Grays River, Hamilton Creek, and the mainstem Columbia River.  In
many other tributaries, potential chum salmon habitat is monitored for
the presence of spawners either through directed surveys or indirectly
with multispecies surveys providing some coverage for most other
populations (Chinook River, Elochoman River, Skamokawa Creek, Mill,
Abernathy, and Germany Creeks and the Lewis River).  Chum salmon are
also enumerated at hatchery traps, tributary weirs, and dam fish passage
facilities.  As part of its Chum salmon restoration program, ODFW
monitors fry production in a number of Coastal MPG steams.  In general,
except where substantial numbers of chum salmon exist, there is limited
directed data collection.

### Abundance and productivity

### Coastal Range MPG

#### Grays River

Surveys for chum salmon are regularly conducted in the Grays River.
Spawner abundances have exhibited a cyclical pattern, with abundances
declining to a few thousand fish in 2013 and 2014, and then peaking in
2016 at a record 30,408 (Figure 74).  The current five-year abundance
geomean was 10,674, a 70% increase over the previous period (Table 40). 
Further, productivity estimates for the last review period have be
generally positive (Figure 75). The majority of the returning chum
salmon have been naturally produced, 95% on average (2015-2019) (Table
42).  The Grays River maintains its position as a stronghold in the MPG
and the ESU, with positive short and long term trends, despite poor
ocean conditions.

#### Other Coastal Range DIPs

Adult chum are intermittently observed in very low numbers in most
tributaries other than the Grays River or Big Creek; insufficient data
is available for meaningful statistical analysis. Supplementation and
reintroduction efforts using surplus hatchery broodstock are underway in
a number of tributaries in this MPG and outmigrating fry have been
observed.  Most notably, the return of nearly a thousand unmarked adults
to Big Creek in 2020 is likely a result of the Hatchery reintroduction
program in that Basin. The origin of adult chum salmon intermittently
observed in other tributaries in this MPG, whether strays from larger
populations, supplementation/reintroduction efforts, or locally
produced  is uncertain.

### Cascade Range MPG

#### Washougal River Chum Salmon

The Washougal River Chum Salmon DIP includes two chum spawning
aggregates in the mainstem Columbia River just upstream of the I-205
bridge in areas influenced by groundwater seeps (Myers *et al.* 2006). 
Population abundance has fluctuated considerably, likely following
changes in ocean conditions, with stronger returns in 2015 and 2016, and
a decline in 2017 and 2018 (Figure 74).  The five-year abundance geomean
for 2015-2019 was 2,703 (Table 40) with productivity being positive for
this period (Figure 75).  As with many of the other chum salmon
populations, Washougal River chum salmon experience highly variable
return rates, but the overall long-term abundance trend has been
strongly positive, 11% (Table 41).

#### Other Cascade Range chum salmon DIPs

There are reports of chum salmon in a number of tributaries, although
systematic surveys for chum are not undertaken.  Chum salmon have also
been collected at a number of hatcheries and weirs throughout this MPG,
but only in very limited numbers . While the absolute numbers of fish
present in many populations are critically low, they may represent
important reserves of genetic diversity.  Finally, there have been
recurring observations of early returning summer chum salmon in the
Cowlitz River, primarily at the Cowlitz Salmon Hatchery trap.

### Gorge MPG

#### Lower Gorge Chum Salmon

This population includes chum salmon returning to Hamilton, Hardy, and
Duncan Creeks, as well as those returning to spawn in the Ives Island
area of the mainstem Columbia River below Bonneville Dam.  Other
mainstem Columbia River spawning aggregations include Multnomah and
Horsetail Creeks on the Oregon shoreline and in the St. Cloud area along
the Washington shoreline.  Recent abundances are, on average, improved
since the last status review; with peak returns in 2015 (5,345) and 2016
(6,103) (Figure 74), compared with the recent five-year abundance
geomean of 3,925 (Table 40).  The overall medium term trend since 2005
is positive, 7% (Table 41), with a 73% increase in the recent five-year
abundance geomean (Table 40).

#### Upper Gorge Chum Salmon

There are no dedicated surveys for chum salmon adults in the Upper Gorge
MPG, estimates are based on chum salmon migrating past Bonneville Dam to
the upper Gorge population area.  The chum salmon adult geometric
average for 2015-2018 was 75; with a 2019 count of 316 (Data from
[<http://www.cbr.washington.edu/>]{.underline} accessed 1 July 2020). 
Interpretation of the Bonneville Dam counts is somewhat problematic
given the large naturally-spawning chum salmon aggregations just below
the Dam.  In addition, spawning above Bonneville Dam is thought to be
very limited due to the loss of historical spawning areas currently
inundated in the Bonneville Pool; however, chum fry have been  observed
at the Bonneville Dam juvenile monitoring facility.

![](./media/media/image87.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="3.823611111111111in"}

Figure .  Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot. Lower Gorge Tributaries
include mainstem Columbia River spawning aggregates (Ives Island,
Horsetail Falls, etc.).  Upper Gorge Tributaries is based on the
Bonneville Dam count, although many Chum salmon counted upstream are
known to have fallen back and spawned below Bonneville Dam.

![Multiple graphs showing the relative productivity of chum salmon
populations from 1995 to 2016 for most populations. Productivity is
based on the average number of adult offspring a salmon produces.
Productivities are generally positive with all of the populations
showing a negative downtick in 2015 and
2016.](./media/media/image88.png){width="6.0in" height="3.53125in"}

Figure . Trends in Lower Columbia River chum salmon demographically
independent population (DIP) productivity from 2000-2015, estimated as
the log of the smoothed natural spawning abundance in year *t*  -
smoothed natural spawning abundance in year (*t* -- 4).

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population       MPG       1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                     Change
  ---------------- --------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Grays/Chinook    Coast                             9770        3589 (3838) 6285 (6709) 10674       70 (69)
  Chum Fall                                          (10616)                             (11310)     

  Washougal Chum   Cascade                                       1004 (808)  \(2176\)    2703 (3127) \(44\)
  Fall                                                                                               

  Low. Gorge       Gorge                             2707 (2707) 754 (773)   2263 (2272) 3925 (3938) 73 (73)
  (Columbia) Chum                                                                                    
  Fall                                                                                               

  Up. Gorge        Gorge     \(18\)      \(43\)      \(61\)      \(122\)     \(96\)      \(75\)      (-22)
  (Columbia) Chum                                                                                    
  Fall                                                                                               
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table .  Five-year geometric mean of raw wild spawner counts for
  Upper Willamette River steelhead.  Willamette Falls counts represent
  counts of prespawning winter steelhead and includes an unknown number
  of non-native early winter run steelhead.  Population estimates
  (1990-2009) were calculated using proportional assignment of
  Willamette Falls counts.  In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw
  total spawner counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that
  a total spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of
  wild spawners available. The geometric mean was computed as the
  product of counts raised to the power 1 over the number of counts
  available (2 to 5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute the
  geometric mean. Percent change between the most recent two 5-year
  periods is shown on the far right.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                       MPG       1990-2005    2004-2019
  -------------------------------- --------- ------------ ----------------
  Grays/Chinook Chum Fall          Coast                  0.07 (0.04,
                                                          0.11)

  Washougal Chum Fall              Cascade                0.11 (0.07,
                                                          0.14)

  Low. Gorge (Columbia) Chum Fall  Gorge                  0.07 (0.04,
                                                          0.11)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Current 5-year geometric mean of raw natural-origin
  abundances and recovery scenario targets presented in the Recovery
  Plan (NMFS 2011) for Upper Willamette River steelhead demographically
  independent populations (DIPs).  Willamette Falls counts include
  non-native early winter-run steelhead, and therefore represents an
  upper limit to total abundance.  No tributary abundance estimates
  available and the approximate total DPS abundance is represented by
  the Willamette Falls count.  This total abundance is compared to the
  sum of the individual DIP targets.  Colors indicate the relative
  proportion of the recovery target currently obtained: red (\<10%),
  orange (10%\>x\<50%), yellow (50%\>x\<100%), green (\>100%).

[Harvest]{.smallcaps}

Columbia River chum salmon were historically abundant and subject to
substantial harvest until the 1950s (Johnson *et al.* 1997).  In recent
years there has been no directed harvest of Columbia River chum salmon. 
Data on the incidental harvest of chum salmon in lower Columbia River
gillnet fisheries exist, but escapement data are inadequate to calculate
exploitation rates.  Incidental commercial landings have been
approximately 100 fish per year since 1993 (except 275 fish in 2010),
and all recreational fisheries have been closed since 1995.  The
incidental harvest rate on Columbia River chum salmon was estimated to
be 0.3% in 2018 (ODFW & WDFW 2020a). Overall, the exploitation rate has
been estimated at below 1% for the last five years.

### Spatial structure and diversity

#### Hatcheries

There are currently four hatchery programs in the Lower Columbia River
releasing juvenile chum salmon: Grays River Hatchery, Big Creek
Hatchery, Lewis River Hatchery, and Washougal Hatchery.  The Lewis River
Hatchery releases fish into the East Fork Lewis River and the Washougal
Hatchery releases fish into Duncan Creek.  The total annual production
from these hatcheries has not exceeded 500,000 fish, with the majority
being released as unmarked fish during their first spring (Figure 76).
Transfers of Grays River eggs to the Big Creek Hatchery are scheduled to
be phased out as production of the Big Creek Hatchery stock is expanded
(Homel 2014).  Unmarked fish collected at the Big Creek weir are
transferred to adjacent tributaries (e.g. Bear Creek), although the
natural return was very low until 2020.  With the exception of the Grays
River stock of fish raised at Big Creek Hatchery, all of the hatchery
programs in this ESU use integrated stocks developed to supplement
natural production.  Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife operates an
egg box program in Coastal MPG tributaries, fry production is monitored
as is adult return in these small tributaries.  Analysis of adult
returns suggest that hatchery production represents a small proportion
of adult returns (Table 42).

 ![https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/\_PY9ZnerlaB0lt4HCzT1L5BkIs49kVF0RKf8iKOgQjlaFQkE4D6nSbN9WfhUgwlut1TaXhYsLgE0G2jYEpB9xAdIBMcUmlb4YqMLwJFLUEr_vn9pl3UZ30AafjtQemM3Duufmw](./media/media/image89.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.4583333333333335in"}

Figure .  Releases of juvenile chum salmon (O. keta) into the Lower
Columbia River.  All releases were from sources originating from within
the ESU.  Data from RMIS
([[http://www.rmpc.org/]{.underline}](http://www.rmpc.org/) accessed 15
April 2020).

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population         1996-2000   2001-2005   2006-2010   2011-2015   2016-2020
  ------------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Grays/Chinook R.   \-          0.92        0.95        0.93        0.95
  Fall                                                               

  Low. Gorge Tribs.  1           0.99        0.98        1.00        1.00
  Fall                                                               

  Up. Gorge Tribs.   \-          \-          \-          \-          \-
  Fall                                                               

  Washougal R. Fall  \-          0.98        0.97        \-          0.99
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year geometric mean of raw natural-origin spawner
  counts. This is the raw total spawner estimate times the fraction
  natural-origin estimate, if available. In parentheses, 5-year
  geometric mean of raw total spawner estimates (i.e., hatchery and
  natural) are shown. A value only in parentheses means that a total
  spawner estimate was available but no (or only one) estimate of
  natural-origin spawners was available. The geometric mean was computed
  as the product of estimates raised to the power 1 over the number of
  counts available (2 to 5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute
  the geometric mean. Percent change between the most recent two 5-year
  periods is shown on the far right.

#### Spatial Structure

Chum salmon generally spawn in the mainstem Columbia River (in areas of
groundwater seeps) and the lower reaches of both large and small
tributaries., with the exception of the Cowlitz River (Myers *et al*.
2006).  In contrast to other species, mainstem dams have less of an
effect on chum salmon distribution, rather it is smaller, stream scale,
blockages that limit chum access to spawning habitat.  Upland
development can also affect the quality of spawning habitat by
disrupting the groundwater upwelling that chum prefer.  In addition,
juvenile habitat has been curtailed through dikes and revetments that
block access to riparian areas that are normally inundated in the
spring.   Loss of lower river and estuary habitat probably limits the
ability of chum salmon to expand and recolonize historical habitat. 
Presently, detectable numbers of chum salmon persist in only 4 of the 
17 DIPs, a fraction of their historical range.

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

Overall, the status of most chum salmon populations is unchanged from
the baseline VSP scores estimated in the recovery plan.  A total of 3 of
17 populations exceed the recovery goals established in the recovery
plan (Dornbush 2013).  The remaining populations have unknown
abundances, although it is reasonable to assume that the abundances are
very low and unlikely to be more that 10% of the established recovery
goal.  Although  the Big Creek DIP is currently supported by a hatchery
supplementation program, natural origin returns have been very low. 
Even with the improvements observed during the last five years, the
majority of DIPs in this ESU remain at a very high risk level.  With so
many primary DIPs at near 0 abundance, none of the MPGs could be
considered viable. 

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Abundance     
  ----------- ------------------------------------ ------------- ---------
  Stratum     Population                           2015-2019     Target

  Coast       Youngs Bay (OR) Fa                   NA            \<500

              Grays/Chinook River (WA) Fa          10,027        1,600

              Big Creek (OR) Fa                    NA            \<500

              Elochoman/Skamokawa (WA) Fa          NA            1,300

              Clatskanie River (OR) Fa             NA            1,000

              Mill/Abernathy/Germany Cr (WA)       NA            1,300

              Scappoose Cr (OR)                    NA            1,000

  Cascade     Cowlitz River (WA) Su                NA            900

              Cowlitz River (WA) Fa                NA            900

              Kalama River (WA) Fa                 NA            900

              Lewis River (WA) Fa                  NA            1,300

              Salmon Cr (WA) Fa                    NA            NA

              Clackamas River (OR) Fa              NA            500

              Sandy River (OR) Fa                  NA            1,000

              Washougal River (WA)                 3,003         1,300

  Gorge       Lower Gorge (WA & OR) Fa             3,124         2,000

              Upper Gorge (WA & OR) Fa             \(85\)        900
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log wild (natural-origin) spawner
  abundance computed from a linear regression applied to the smoothed
  wild (natural-origin) spawner log abundance estimate. Only populations
  with at least 4 wild spawner estimates are shown and with at least 2
  data points in the first 5 years and last 5 years of the 15-year
  periods. Lower and upper bounds of the 95% confidence intervals of the
  estimates are in parentheses.

### Updated biological risk summary

It is notable that during this most recent review period, the three
populations (Grays River, Washougal, and Lower Gorge DIPS) improved
markedly in abundance.  Improvements in productivity were observed in
almost every year during the 2015-2019 interval (Figure 74)   This is
somewhat surprising, given that the majority of chum salmon emigrate to
the ocean as subyearlings after only a few weeks, and one would have
expected the poor ocean conditions to have had a strong negative 
influence on the survival of juvenile (as with many of the other ESUs in
this region).  In contrast to the three DIPs, the remaining populations
in this ESU have not exhibited any detectable improvement in status. 
Abundances for these populations are assumed to be at or near zero, and
straying from nearby healthy populations do not seems sufficient to
reestablish self-sustaining populations.  It may be that the chum salmon
life history strategy of  emigrating post emergence *en masse* (possibly
as a predator swamping mechanism) requires a critical number of spawners
to be effective.

Of the risk factors considered, freshwater habitat conditions may be
negatively influencing spawning and early rearing success in some
basins, and contributing to the overall low productivity of the ESU. 
Recent studies also suggest that a freshwater parasite, *Ceratonova*
shasta, may be limiting the survival of juvenile chum salmon (WDFW
2019).  The prevalence of this parasite may increase with warmer water
temperatures from flow modification or climatic change.  Land
development, especially in the low gradient reaches that chum salmon
prefer, will continue to be a threat to most chum populations due to
projected increases in the population of the greater Vancouver-Portland
area and the Lower Columbia River overall (Metro 2014).  The viability
of this ESU is relatively unchanged since the last review and the
improvements in some populations do not warrant a change in risk
category, especially given the uncertainty regarding climatic effects in
the near future.  This ESU therefore remains at moderate to high risk.

## Upper Willamette Chinook salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU

The ESU includes all naturally spawning populations of spring-run
Chinook salmon in the Clackamas River and in the Willamette River, and
its tributaries, above Willamette Falls, Oregon, as well as several
artificial propagation programs (85 FR 81822, Figure 77).  Seven
demographically independent populations (DIPs) were identified by the
TRT (Myers *et al.* 2006).

![](./media/media/image90.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure .  Map of the seven demographically independent populations
(DIPs) within the Upper Willamette River Chinook salmon ESU's.  Areas
that are accessible (green), accessible only via trap and haul programs
(yellow), or blocked (cross-hatched) are indicated accordingly.

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2005*

NMFS initially reviewed the status of the Upper Willamette River Chinook
salmon ESU in 1998 (Myers 1998) and with an update that same year (NMFS
1998).  In the 1998 update, the BRT was concerned about the few
remaining naturally-spawning populations of spring-run Chinook salmon in
the Upper Willamette River ESU, and the high proportion of hatchery fish
in the remaining runs. The 1998 BRT noted that the Oregon Department of
Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) was able to identify only one remaining
naturally reproducing population in this ESU, McKenzie River spring-run
Chinook salmon[^5].  The 1998 BRT was concerned about severe declines in
short-term abundance that occurred throughout the ESU, and that the
McKenzie River population had declined precipitously, indicating that it
may not be self-sustaining.  The 1998 BRT also noted that the potential
for interactions between native spring-run and introduced fall-run
Chinook salmon had increased relative to historical times due to past
fall-run Chinook salmon hatchery programs and the laddering of
Willamette Falls.  The 1998 BRT partially attributed the declines in
spring-run Chinook salmon in the Upper Willamette River ESU to the
extensive habitat blockages caused by dam construction.  A majority of
the 1998 BRT concluded that the Upper Willamette River Chinook salmon
ESU was likely to become endangered in the foreseeable future.  A
minority of 1998 BRT members felt that Chinook salmon in this ESU were
not presently in danger of extinction, nor were they likely to become so
in the foreseeable future.

The 2005 BRT considered updated abundance information, habitat
accessibility analyses and the results of preliminary Willamette Lower
Columbia Technical Recovery Team (WLC-TRT) analyses.  These analyses
supported previous BRT conclusions that the majority of populations in
the ESU were likely extirpated or nearly so and that excessive numbers
of hatchery fish and loss of access to historical habitat were important
risk factors.  The McKenzie River population was the only population
identified as potentially self-sustaining and increases in abundance
were noted for this population in the most recent returns available at
the time (2000 and 2001).  However, the BRT was concerned about the
long-term potential for this population.  The majority (70%) of the 2005
BRT votes fell in the "likely to become endangered" category, with a
minority in the "in danger of extinction" and the "not likely to become
endangered" categories.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) noted that two related status evaluations of UW
Chinook had been conducted since the previous status review update in
2005.  Both evaluations were based on the WLC-TRT viability criteria and
both concluded that the ESU was at very high risk of extinction.  Of the
seven historical populations in the ESU, five were considered at very
high risk.  The remaining two (Clackamas and McKenzie) were considered
to be at moderate to low risk. The new data reviewed in 2010 also
highlighted the substantial risks associated with pre-spawning
mortality.  Although the recovery plans that were being developed at
that time targeted key limiting factors for future actions (specifically
passage at high head dams), in 2010 there had not yet been any
significant on-the-ground-actions to resolve the lack of access to
historical habitat above dams nor had there been substantial actions
removing hatchery fish from the spawning grounds.  Overall, the new
information considered in 2010 did not indicate a change in the
biological risk category since the time of the last BRT status review in
2005.

*2015*

The 2015 status review update (NWFSC 2015) determined that although
overall abundance of natural origin spawners was somewhat lower than in
2010, the risk status remained unchanged.  Adult abundance data was
limited in some cases.  Of the seven DIPs in this ESU, two: the Molalla
and Calapooia rivers are not surveyed to any extent, and a third, the
Clackamas River, is represented by a dam count of returning adults
although some spawning ground surveys were available.  The remaining
four populations were comprehensively surveyed in a systematic manner. 
Data collected included: dam counts (prespawning counts), multiple
spawner and redd counts, and carcass recoveries.  Prespawn mortality was
considerable in some years and reduced the relevancy of adult dam counts
and underscoring the importance of on-the-ground surveys.  In 2015,
major dams continued to reduce or eliminate adult access to well over
50% of the historical upstream spawning habitat in the Clackamas, North
Santiam, South Santiam, McKenzie, and Middle Fork Willamette rivers. 
Furthermore, the results from genetic pedigree studies indicated
variable but low reproductive success for chinook salmon reintroduced
above (\< 1:1 spawner to recruit ratio). Juvenile passage and survival
data at the dams are limited and highly variable. Only at Foster Dam
(South Santiam DIP) and Fall Creek Dam (Middle Fork Willamette ESU) were
spawner replacement levels achieved in some years.

The apparent decline in the status of the McKenzie River DIP was a
source of concern given that this population was previously seen as a
stronghold of natural production in the ESU.  In contrast to most of the
other populations in this ESU, McKenzie River Chinook salmon have access
to much of their historical spawning habitat, although access to high
quality habitat above Cougar Dam (South Fork McKenzie River) was still
limited by poor downstream juvenile passage.  Additionally, the
installation of a temperature control structure in Cougar Dam in 2005
was thought to benefit downstream spawning and rearing success.  For the
2010-2015 period, natural-origin returns to the Clackamas River remained
flat, despite adults having access to much of their historical spawning
habitat.  Although adults returning to the Calapooia and Molalla basin
are not impeded by dams, habitat conditions (primarily summer
temperatures) are such that the productivity of these systems was
thought to be very low (near zero).  Natural-origin spawners in the
Middle Fork Willamette River consisted almost entirely of adults
returning to Fall Creek.  The abundance of returning NOR adults to the
Fall Creek Dam numbered in the hundreds; however, marginal habitat
conditions resulted in high prespawn mortality and reduced the number of
spawners to a third or a half of that number.  Finally, improvements
were noted in the North and South Santiam DIPs.  This increase in
abundance in both DIPs was in contrast to the other DIPs and the counts
at Willamette Falls.  While spring-run Chinook salmon in the South
Santiam DIP have access to some of their historical spawning habitat,
natural origin spawners in the North Santiam are still confined to below
Detroit Dam and subject to relatively high prespawn mortality rates in
accessible reaches below the Big Cliff/Detroit Dam complex, potentially
related to high levels of total dissolved gas. 

Although there was an overall decrease in the VSP status of the ESU
since the last review (Ford *et al*. 2011), the magnitude of this change
was not sufficient to suggest a change in risk category.  Climatic
conditions at the time of the review (drought and warm ocean waters) and
the prospect of long-term climatic change in conjunction with the
inability of many populations to access historical headwater spawning
and rearing areas were considered major near-term and long-term risks to
this ESU.

### Description of new data available for this review

Comprehensive spawner surveys (redds and carcasses) were conducted both
below and above dams in the North Santiam, South Santiam, McKenzie, and
Middle Fork Willamette rivers by ODFW through 2017.  In the McKenzie
Basin, comprehensive surveys were done in 2018 and 2019. Only partial
surveys could be done in 2020 because of forest fires (surveys were done
on the mainstem below Leaburg, Horse Creek, and the restoration area in
the South Fork McKenzie River). Wild carcasses were sampled in these
areas. In the North Santiam basin, comprehensive surveys were done above
the dams in 2018 and 2019. Sections below the dams were surveyed only
for peak redd counts and distribution. In the South Santiam Basin,
comprehensive surveys were done above the dams in 2018 -2020. Sections
below the dams were surveyed only for peak redd counts and distribution,
with carcasses sampled in 2020. Comprehensive surveys were done in the
Clackamas and Molalla basins from 2015-2019 (surveys could not be done
in 2020 because of forest fires). In the Middle Fork basin, surveys were
done for peak redd counts in 2018 and collaborators at OSU did some
surveys in the Middle Fork basin in 2020. Collaborators at OSU also
surveyed the Middle Fork Willamette in 2020.

Direct adult counts are also made at Willamette Falls, Bennett Dam and
Minto Fish Facility (North Santiam), Foster Fish Facility (South
Santiam), Leaburg and Cougar dams and the McKenzie Hatchery (McKenzie
River), Fall Creek Dam and Dexter Fish Facility (Middle Fork Willamette
River).  Intermittent spawner surveys have been conducted in the Molalla
and Calapooia rivers, but are insufficient to estimate population
abundance.  Beginning in 2018, there has been a transition in the
methodology and extent of adult spawner surveys.  The US Army Corps of
Engineers, which had funded much of the previous survey work
transitioned from ODFW to private contractors, and limited the extent of
those surveys.  In 2018 and 2019, parallel spawner survey efforts were
undertaken by ODFW and Environmental Assessment Services EAS (Normandeau
Associates Inc. (NAI) 2019).  Comparison of results from 2018 indicated
considerable disagreement in spawner abundances in the North Santiam
River, South Santiam River, and McKenzie River.  For example in 2018,
North and South Santiam redd counts by EAS were 57.8% higher than ODFW
counts, while in the McKenzie River ODFW redd counts were 49.1% higher
than EAS.  Surveys in Fall Creek were interrupted by forest fires,
although the number of fish passed upstream at Fall Creek Dam is known. 
After 2019, spawner surveys below dams in the North and South Santiam,
previously funded for by the USACE were terminated, and ODFW continued
with surveys, although on a more limited scale than before.  The
existence of contrasting estimates and the changes in established
methodology for spawner data from 2018 and 2019 make interpretation of
abundances from foot and boat surveys more difficult.  For our analysis
we considered only the ODFW time series estimates in order to preserve
survey methodology consistency.  Adult estimates from ladder counts at
Willamette Falls, the Bennett dams, Leaburg Dam, and fish collection
facilities and hatcheries continue to be collected, and provide a
consistent reference point for interpreting spawner surveys.

Genetic pedigree studies of adults returning to tributary dams in the
Upper Willamette have been ongoing at Detroit Dam (North Santiam River),
Foster Dam (South Santiam River), Cougar Dam (McKenzie River) and Fall
Creek Dam (Banks *et al.* 2014a; Evans *et al.* 2016; O\'Malley & Bohn
2017).  These studies provide information on the productivity of adults
transported above impassable dams, and are critical in evaluating the
success of juvenile fish passage systems.  Collection of tissues for
genetic analyses are ongoing at adult collection facilities associated
with trap and haul programs at high head dams and from natural fish
collected during spawner surveys; however, not all tissue samples will
be genetically analyzed each year.  Archiving tissue samples further
delays any assessment of reproductive success.  

Overall, the development of long-term abundance data for four of the
DIPs in the Upper Willamette River Chinook salmon ESU provides
considerable insight into population abundance and productivity.  Stream
surveys and carcass recoveries allow the estimation of the contribution
of hatchery-origin fish to the naturally-spawning population.  There is
some uncertainty in estimates for 2018 and 2019, and future monitoring
will likely be further constrained by limited resources.

### Abundance and productivity

### Willamette Falls

Chinook salmon counts at Willamette Falls have been undertaken since
1946, when 53,000 Chinook salmon were counted; however, not until 2002
with the return of the first cohort of mass-marked hatchery-reared fish
was it possible to inventory naturally-produced fish with any accuracy. 
Cohorts returning from 2015-2019 were strongly influenced by warmer than
normal and less productive ocean conditions, in addition to warmer and
drier than normal freshwater conditions.  The five-year average
abundance geomean for 2015-2019 was 6,916 natural-origin (unmarked)
adults, a 31% decrease from the previous period (Table 44).  While there
was a substantial downward trend in total and natural-origin spring-run
abundance at Willamette Falls (Figure 78), there were some indications
of improving abundance in 2019 and 2020.   Improvements in abundance
corresponded with improved ocean and freshwater conditions, as well as
changes in pinniped predation.  In recent years counts of spring-run
Chinook salmon at Willamette Falls have been influenced by pinniped
predation at the base of the falls.  For the return years 2014-2018,
pinnipeds were estimated to consume 6-10% of the unmarked Chinook salmon
escapement; however, in 2019, when a pinniped removal program was
initiated the rate dropped to approximately 4% (Steingass *et al.*
2019).  Over the last 15-years the long term trend for natural-origin
returns was -4% (Table 45), suggesting an overall decline in those
populations above Willamette Falls.

### Clackamas River Chinook Salmon

Returning spring-run Chinook salmon are enumerated at North Fork Dam and
outmigrating juveniles are collected and counted at River Mill Dam.  In
contrast to the other populations in this ESU the recent 5-year trend is
positive (Table 44; Figure 79).  The most recent five-year abundance
geomean is 3,617, a 91% increase over the 2010-2014 period (Table 44). 
The long-term trend for this population is 6% (Table 45).  Improvements
in adult returns are likely associated with improvements in the juvenile
collection facilities installed by Portland General Electric (PGE) at
their dam complex (River Mill, Faraday, and North Fork dams).  A new
adult sorting facility was completed in 2013, eliminating the need to
handle fish (David *et al.* 2016). Recent habitat restoration projects
have been completed in the upper basin Spawning in the upper Clackamas
is now occurring farther upstream and redds are more widely distributed.
Juvenile fish guidance efficiencies for Chinook salmon were recently
estimated at 85.5% (Ackerman and Pyper 2020).  Given the resilience in
adult abundance during the past period of relatively poor ocean
conditions, it is expected that the current positive trend will continue
into the next 5-year review period with improving ocean conditions.
Further, the Clackamas River enters the Willamette River below
Willamette Falls and conditions in the mainstem Upper Willamette River,
above Willamette Falls, may be limiting the other populations in this
ESU which share an adult and juvenile migratory corridor.

### Molalla River Chinook Salmon

Chinook salmon surveys were carried out from 2015-2019.  Low abundances
(\<100 redds) were observed.  A radio tagging study found that only 2 of
the 300 returning Chinook salmon adults tagged at Willamette Falls were
detected to enter the Molalla River (Jepson *et al.* 2015).  Coded-wire
tags from juvenile releases in the Molalla River have been recovered in
the Molalla in 2016 (Sharpe *et al.* 2017).  Abundance information is
limited to anecdotal reports, recreational catch reports, and recent
surveys, all of which are insufficient to provide a useful estimate of
abundance; however, it is reasonable to assume that the abundance of
natural-origin Chinook salmon is very low.

### North Santiam River Chinook Salmon

Adult NOR returns to the North Santiam River, as measured at Bennett Dam
and through redd and carcass surveys, have exhibited a decrease in
abundance (Figure 79).  The five-year average abundance geomean for
natural-origin spawners was 354, a 12% decrease from the previous period
(Table 44).  Estimates of NORs at Bennett Dam from 2015-2019 ranged from
573 to 1059, geometric mean of 849, suggesting either considerable
prespawning mortality or an undercount of spawners.  Prespawn mortality
varies considerably from year to year, in 2015 during an exceptionally
warm dry summer prespawn mortality was estimated to be 63% in the North
Santiam below Detroit Dam, but only 3% in 2016 (Sharpe *et al*. 2017). 
Genetic analysis of returning adults suggests that there is some
contribution to escapement by the progeny of hatchery-origin spawners
transported above Detroit Dam.  Presently, natural-origin fish that
reach the fish handling facilities at Minto are released above the fish
barrier to spawn in the North Santiam reach between Minto and Big Cliff
Dam.  While this "sanctuary" reach is populated with unmarked adult
Chinook salmon, temperature and dissolved gas conditions may contribute
to elevated prespawning mortality levels (Sharpe *et al.* 2018). 
Further, conditions in the Minto to Big Cliff Reach make accurate
spawner surveys difficult.

### South Santiam River Chinook Salmon

Spring-run Chinook salmon adults returning to the South Santiam River
are monitored via redd counts and carcass recoveries in the South
Santiam.  In addition direct counts of returning adults are made at the
Foster fish collection facility at Foster Dam, where only NORs are
passed above the dam.  For the current period, the five-year spawner
abundance geomean for the entire South Santiam was 337, a 45% decrease
from 2010-2014 (Table 44, Figure 79).  The Foster Dam counts, which
represent fish migrating to the upper South Santiam River, for this same
period had a geomean of 305; however, this does not account for prespawn
mortality or fallbacks.  The long-term trend (2015-2019) for South
Santiam River natural-origin Chinook salmon has been negative, -3%
(Table 45).  Attempts to improve upstream adult collection with a new
adult facility and downstream juvenile passage with a weir gate at
Foster Dam have encountered operational difficulties and instead
resulted in decreased adult attraction to the adult collection facility
and increased juvenile mortality passing through the weir gate.  

### Calapooia River Chinook Salmon

There has been limited monitoring of spring-run Chinook salmon in the
Calapooia River basin, in part due to the low numbers of adults
returning to the basin.  Supplementation efforts have been terminated,
large-scale releases were last made in 1997, although small numbers of
fry (\<50mm) were released through 2008.  None of the fish that were
radio-tagged at Willamette Falls in 2012-2014 were detected entering the
Calapooia (Jepson *et al* 2015).  A few adult Chinook salmon were
observed in snorkel surveys in 2012, but it is unclear if they
successfully spawned.   Since 2012, neither juvenile or adult Chinook
salmon have been observed in annual snorkel surveys in the Calapooia
River.  Based on the limited information available, it would appear the
Calapooia River Chinook salmon population is at a critically low level,
at or near zero.

### McKenzie River Chinook Salmon

Within the recent review period the average natural-origin abundance in
the McKenzie River has increased by 13%, to a five-year geomean of 1,664
(Table 44, Figure 79).  This improvement in abundance marks a reversal
of long-term declines.  Still, the long term trend in abundance
(2015-2019) is -2% (Table 45).  The McKenzie River has been a bellwether
for natural production in the Upper Willamette Basin, with the majority
of historical spawning habitat still accessible.  Natural-origin
spawners represent the majority of spawners, 57% (Table 46), especially
in the upper reaches (NAI et al. 2020). Genetic pedigree based estimates
of cohort replacement rate for the 2007 and 2008 broodyears from
hatchery adults released above Cougar Dam, were both below replacement,
0.41 and 0.31, respectively (Banks *et al.* 2014a).  Juvenile tagging
studies indicate that total survival through Cougar Reservoir and Dam
project has been poor (Beeman *et al.* 2013).  Currently, there are
multiple options for structural or operational juvenile downstream
passage being investigated, with actualization of a passage strategy
still some years off.  Additional passage and survival data for juvenile
Chinook salmon would help evaluate different passage operations. Habitat
restoration efforts by the US Forest Service below Cougar Dam on the
South Fork McKenzie River were recently completed and represent a major
effort to enhance the floodplain, although it may be some years before
the full measure of success for this effort can be evaluated. Redd
counts in the restoration area dramatically increased in 2018 and 2019.

### Middle Fork Willamette River and Fall Creek Chinook Salmon

Chinook salmon in the Middle Fork Willamette River are monitored through
redd and carcass surveys throughout much of the basin.  In addition,
fish are enumerated at both the Dexter Trap and at the Fall Creek trap
below Fall Creek Dam.  Natural-origin spawner abundance represents redds
surveyed below Dexter Dam and above Fall Creek Dam.  During the
2015-2019 review period, the geomean dropped to 20, a 78% decrease in
abundance.  Natural-origin spawners (Figure 79) are limited to spawning
in the mainstem Middle Fork Willamette River below Dexter Dam, below
Fall Creek Dam, and Little Fall Creek, where conditions were especially
poor during 2015-2019, and above Fall Creek Dam where the majority of
natural-origin fish return (Sharpe *et al*. 2017).  Prespawn mortality
rates are generally very high, often near 100% below Fall Creek Dam, and
only marginally better above Fall Creek Dam. (Sharpe *et al.* 2017;
Normandeau Associates Inc. (NAI) 2019, 2020).  In addition, the Jones
Fire in the Fall Creek watershed in 2017 likely had immediate and
long-term effects on fish survival in the basin.  Similarly, areas
burned in the Willamette Basin in 2019 and 2020 will suffer from the
loss of riparian habitat and the deposition of sediment and ash from
denuded hillsides.  Accessible habitat in the Middle Fork Willamette
River is very limited and until effective upstream and downstream
passage past the dams is developed it is unlikely that abundance will
improve markedly.

![https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/OgsPzayLv6obV-ZGjTWPx_NWmvIVd8-QOoujF22jGjg6RSSAAcArfQOUDTGSh5JrE3DMQzXjN62r2Y2ZewYGuz7Va-2Pr9L5XZJuCFlfmHRHlpxihjbi28BXMZD9fSSlJgpyKg](./media/media/image91.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="2.40625in"}

Figure .  Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.  

![](./media/media/image92.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="3.823611111111111in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot. 

![https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/CrJlAw4L0X8bSalg-6ZFQKMLz8t8qKPgnGS2G6cM6RElDGNSWwoFbNldfJT_gFMCvGd08gTi0H67v0CrkQNXFhAITipOI7QMqBeIAHH5-r07obFK2KXwI67g5W-lIzCgsLupeA](./media/media/image93.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.53125in"}

Figure .  Trends in Willamette Falls counts and population productivity,
estimated as the log of the smoothed natural spawning abundance in year
t  - smoothed natural spawning abundance in year (t -- 4).

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population    MPG       1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                  Change
  ------------- --------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Willamette    Cascade   \(42031\)   \(27817\)   21833       8482        9975        6916        -31
  Falls Spring                                    (68324)     (26529)     (40236)     (32189)     (-20)

  Clackamas R.  Cascade   1291 (3961) 466 (1430)  2110 (3920) 1482 (1906) 1894 (2013) 3617 (3722) 91 (85)
  Spring                                                                                          

  N. Santiam R. Cascade                                       333 (1064)  401 (1584)  354 (1424)  -12
  Spring                                                                                          (-10)

  S. Santiam R. Cascade                                       416 (1281)  613 (1685)  337 (1856)  -45
  Spring                                                                                          (-10)

  McKenzie R.   Cascade                                       1794 (2856) 1479 (2750) 1664 (2916) 13 (6)
  Spring                                                                                          

  MF Willamette Cascade                                                   92 (1209)   20 (407)    -78
  R. Spring                                                                                       (-66)
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year mean of fraction of natural-origin spawners (sum
  of all estimates divided by the number of estimates). 

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population             MPG          1990-2005         2004-2019
  ---------------------- ------------ ----------------- ------------------
  Willamette Falls                                      -0.04
  Spring                                                (-0.06,-0.01)

  Clackamas R. Spring    Willamette   0.05 (-0.03,      0.06 (0.03, 0.09)
                                      0.13)             

  McKenzie R. Spring     Willamette                     -0.02 (-0.05, 0)

  N. Santiam R. Spring   Willamette                     -0.01 (-0.03,
                                                        0.02)

  S. Santiam R. Spring   Willamette                     -0.03 (-0.08,
                                                        0.02)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table .  Population designation issues in Puget Sound Chinook
  populations for NW Science Center 5-year status review

### Harvest

Upper Willamette river spring Chinook are taken in ocean fisheries
primarily in Canada and Alaska.  They are also taken in lower mainstem
Columbia River commercial gillnet fisheries, and in recreational
fisheries in the mainstem Columbia River and the Willamette River. 
These fisheries are directed at hatchery production, but historically
could not discriminate between natural and hatchery fish.  In the late
1990s ODFW began mass-marking the hatchery production, and recreational
fisheries within the Willamette River switched over to retention of only
hatchery fish, with mandatory release of unmarked fish.  Ocean
fisheries, with the exception of 2016, have been low (Figure 81).  The
majority of harvest in fresh freshwater fisheries is mark-selective and
harvest rates for naturally produced fish would be considerably less
(Figure 82).  The Fisheries Management Plan for the Willamette River
sets the maximum freshwater mortality rate for naturally produced
Chinooks salmon at 15% (ODFW & WDFW 2020a).  Illegal take of unmarked
fish is thought to be low.

![](./media/media/image94.emf){width="6.5in"
height="4.204861111111111in"}

Figure . Willamette River Spring Chinook ocean harvest, terminal
harvest, and escapement rates for Upper Willamette River spring-run
Chinook salmon based on coded-wire tag recoveries (PSC 2019).  Ocean
harvest rates for hatchery and unmarked naturally-produced fish are
assumed to be comparable, terminal fisheries have been mark selective
since 2001 and unmarked fish mortality rates will be considerable lower,
hooking mortality in the Willamette River is assumed to be 12.2% (ODFW
and WDFW 2020).  Black dashed line indicates the time of ESA listing.

![](./media/media/image95.emf){width="6.013888888888889in"
height="3.361111111111111in"}

Figure .  Breakdown of terminal fisheries for UWR Chinook salmon.  Lower
Willamette River (LWR) and Upper Willamette River (UWR) recreational
(Rec) fisheries are mark-selective and reflect retention of clipped fish
and encounter/hooking mortalities of unmarked fish, hooking mortality
rates for the Willamette River are estimated at 12.2% (ODFW and WDFW
2020).

### Spatial structure and diversity

For Upper Willamette River Chinook salmon diversity concerns include
interaction and introgression with hatchery-origin Chinook salmon. 
Johnson and Friesen (2014) examined the genetic diversity and structure
of natural- and hatchery-origin UWR spring Chinook salmon and found that
hatchery populations were most similar to wild Chinook salmon from the
same basin, yet (hatchery populations) tended to present greater allelic
richness. It is not clear whether this is due to the small effective
population size of naturally-spawning populations, or the legacy of
inter-hatchery transfers between basins. There have been a number of
changes in hatchery operations since the initial status review (Myers
*et al.* 1998).  In general, production levels are based on mitigation
agreements related to the construction of dams in the Willamette River
Basin (Figure 83).  Mass marking of hatchery-origin Chinook salmon began
in 1997, with all returning adults being marked by 2002.  Off-station
releases within some basins have been curtailed in an effort to limit
natural spawning by hatchery-origin fish.  Releases of juvenile Chinook
salmon into the Coast Fork, a West side tributary that does not support
a Chinook salmon population, have been made in an effort to maintain a
harvestable hatchery return, but reduce hatchery x natural adult
interaction on the natural spawning grounds in Eastside tributaries. 
Some of these returning adults have returned to their hatchery of origin
rather than the Coast Fork release site.  A review of hatchery
operations by the Hatchery Science Review Group (HSRG) in 2009
identified a number of modifications to improve the status of Chinook
salmon.  Foremost was an increase in the proportion of
naturally-produced fish into the hatchery broodstock; however, in many
basins the abundance of naturally-produced Chinook salmon was critically
low precluding their use as broodstock (HSRG 2009).  Further the HSRG
(2009) concluded:

> > Options for improving the integrated hatchery programs in this ESU
> > are limited due to the low number of natural-origin fish in the
> > subbasin. This is generally the result of limited access to quality
> > habitat cut off by flood control and hydropower development. Options
> > for improving hatchery programs or achieving conservation goals are
> > limited until this issue is addressed. Contribution to conservation
> > was improved for one population by improving broodstock collection
> > and reducing the size of its integrated harvest program. (pg 46)

Recent improvements at the Cougar (2010), Minto (2012), Foster (2014),
and Fall Creek (2019) fish collection facilities offer the potential for
collecting more hatchery origin adults and removing them from the
natural-spawning component of the populations.  Increased collection
efficiency has been observed at the Cougar and Minto facilities, while
the recently completed Foster facility appears to require further
modifications.  In concert with improvements in collection efficiency,
the number of hatchery fish released has decreased in most basins where
there is natural spawning, with increased releases in westside
tributaries (Figure 83).  In general, the influence of hatchery-origin
Chinook salmon on the spawning grounds has shown a slight improvement,
with the exception of the South Santiam where fish collection at new
facility has been poor (Keefer *et al.* 2018) leaving more
hatchery-origin fish to spawn below Foster Dam (Table 46).

![](./media/media/image96.emf){width="6.013888888888889in"
height="4.041666666666667in"}

Figure .  Hatchery releases of juvenile spring-run Chinook salmon into
basins of the Upper Willamette Chinook salmon ESU from 1990-2019.  Data
for 2019 may be incomplete.  Releases of juveniles weighing less than
2.5 grams were not included.  Releases into the Row and Coast Fork
rivers were combined under Westside Tributaries.  Data from Regional
Mark Processing Center (RMPC.org) accessed 29 June 2020.

More recently, NMFS finalized an Biological Opinion (BIOP) on hatchery
operations in the Upper Willamette Basin and recommended a number of
changes to minimize the potential influence of hatchery-origin fish on
natural-origin Chinook salmon and steelhead (NMFS 2019c).  Through the
(BIOP) and the individual hatchery genetic and management plans (HGMPs),
hatcheries in the Upper Willamette River have reduced releases of
spring-run Chinook salmon in the McKenzie and North Santiam rivers,
while shifting production to other basins (Figure 83).  In addition, the
BIOP calls for further action in the McKenzie River to further reduce
the number of hatchery fish spawning naturally.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population           1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  -------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Willamette Falls     \-          0.24        0.30        0.24        0.22
  Count                                                                

  Clackamas R. Spring  0.33        0.58        0.79        0.94        0.97

  McKenzie R. Spring   \-          \-          0.64        0.55        0.57

  MF Willamette R.     \-          \-          \-          0.08        0.07
  Spring                                                               

  N. Santiam R. Spring \-          \-          0.33        0.26        0.26

  S. Santiam R. Spring \-          \-          0.39        0.40        0.21
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table .  Five-year geometric mean of raw natural spawner counts for
  Puget Sound steelhead. This is the raw total spawner count times the
  fraction natural estimate, if available. In parentheses, the 5-year
  geometric mean of raw total spawner counts is shown. A value only in
  parentheses means that a total spawner count was available but none or
  only one estimate of natural spawners was available. The geometric
  mean was computed as the product of counts raised to the power 1 over
  the number of counts available (2 to 5). A minimum of 2 values was
  used to compute the geometric mean. Percent change between the most
  recent two 5-year periods is shown on the far right.  MPG, major
  population group; NC, Northern Cascades, SCC South and Central
  Cascades, HCSJF, Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca, W, winter run;
  S, summer run.

Spatial structure issues remain a major concern in the Willamette
Basin.  Major dams block volitional passage to historical Chinook salmon
habitat in five of the seven DIPs in the ESU.  In most cases effective
passage programs are limited by low collection rates for emigrating
juveniles.  Recent improvements in the juvenile collection at the
Clackamas River dams (River Mill and North Fork dams) have resulted in a
91.7% collection efficiency in 2018-2019 (Ackerman and Pyper 2020).  The
improved juvenile collection facility captured 195,123 Chinook salmon
juveniles in 2018 and 71,370 in 2019.  Juvenile fish passage is also
provided at Foster Dam, South Santiam River, where fish can move
downstream via the turbines or spill.  Recent efforts to improve
juvenile passage with a fish weir unfortunately resulted in higher
passage mortalities under high pool conditions (Liss *et al.* 2020). 
Effective juvenile fish passage is also provided through Fall Creek Dam
(Middle Fork Willamette River DIP) via operational draw down of the
reservoir in the fall (Murphy *et al.* 2019).  The reservoir drawdown
also had the added benefit of removing non-native species that are
potential predators of juvenile salmonids.  Juvenile passage in the
South Fork McKenzie River and North Santiam have been done on an
experimental basis, and juvenile collection and passage survival have
not been sufficient to sustain naturally-spawning Chinook salmon above
the dams.  Interim measures to improve passage have been proposed for
these dams and dams in the Middle Fork Willamette River, but have yet to
be initiated or evaluated.  Longer term structural or operational
passage solutions are still being developed.  Similarly, passage
solutions at the Carmen-Smith Dam on the upper McKenzie River are also
in the planning stage.

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

Abundance levels for all but one of the seven DIPs in this ESU remain
well below their recovery goals.  The Clackamas River DIP currently
exceeds its abundance recovery goal and its pHOS goal (\<10%
hatchery-origin fish).  Alternatively, the Calapooia River may be
functionally extinct and the Molalla River remains critically low (there
is considerable uncertainty in the level of natural production in the
Molalla River).  Abundances in the North and South Santiam rivers have
declined since the last review, with natural-origin abundances in the
low hundreds of fish.  The Middle Fork Willamette River is at a very low
abundance, even with the inclusion of natural origin spring run Chinook
salmon spawning in Fall Creek.  While returns to Fall Creek Dam number
in the low hundreds, prespawn mortality rates are very high in the
basin; however, the Fall Creek program does provide valuable information
on juvenile fish passage through operational drawdown.  With the
exception of the Clackamas River, the proportion of natural origin
spawners in the remainder of the ESU is well below those identified  in
the recovery goals.  

While the Clackamas River appears to be able to sustain above recovery
goal abundances, even during relatively poor ocean and freshwater
conditions, the remainder of the ESU is well short of its recovery
goals.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          Abundance   
  --------- ----------------------------- ----------- ----------------------
  Stratum   Population                    2015-2019   CATAS Abundance

  Cascade   Clackamas River Spring        3,617       2,317

            Molalla River Spring          NA          696

            North Santiam River Spring    354         5,400

            South Santiam River Spring    337         3,100

            Calapooia River Spring        NA          590

            McKenzie River Spring         1,664       8,376

            Middle Fork Willamette River  20          5,820
            Spring                                    
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log natural spawner abundance computed
  from a linear regression applied to the smoothed natural spawner log
  abundance estimate. Only populations with at least 4 natural spawner
  estimates from 1980 to 2014 are shown and with at least 2 data points
  in the first 5 years and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

### Updated biological risk summary

Access to historical spawning and rearing areas is restricted by high
head dams in the five of the historically most productive tributaries. 
Only in the Clackamas River does the current adult trap and haul and
juvenile collection system appear to be effective enough to sustain a
naturally-spawning population (although current juvenile passage
efficiencies are still below NMFS criteria).  In the McKenzie River, the
spring-run Chinook salmon population appears to be relatively stable,
having reversed a short-term downward abundance trend that was of
concern during the last review.  The McKenzie River remains well below
its recovery goal, despite having volitional access to much of its
historical spawning habitat.  The North and South Santiam River DIPs
both experienced declines in abundance.  Much of the accessible habitat
for these populations is relatively poor, and under the warmer and drier
conditions experienced during this review period both juvenile and adult
survivals were likely disproportionately affected.  Further, water
conditions at the adult collection facility at Foster Dam failed to
attract adults for transportation to the Upper South Santiam River and
resulted in more fish spawning below Foster Dam in less desirable
habitat.  The Middle Fork Willamette River is limited to spawning below
Dexter Dam, where conditions all but preclude successful spawning. Under
current conditions, Fall Creek is likely near its capacity of several
hundred fish.  The Calapooia and Molalla rivers are constrained by
habitat conditions and natural reproduction is likely extremely low.
Demographic risks remain high or very high for most populations, except
the Clackamas and McKenzie rivers, which are at low and low to moderate
risk, respectively.  The Clackamas River spring-run Chinook salmon
population maintains a low pHOS through the removal of all marked
hatchery-origin adults at North Fork Dam.  Elsewhere, hatchery-origin
fish comprise the majority or in the case of the McKenzie River, nearly
half of the naturally-spawning population.  Diversity risks continue to
be a concern.

Spatial structure, specifically access to historical spawning habitat
continues to be a concern.  In the absence of effective passage
programs, spawners in the North Santiam, Middle Fork Willamette, and to
a lesser extent South Santiam and McKenzie rivers will continue to be
confined to more lowland reaches where land development, water
temperatures, and water quality may be limiting.  Pre-spawning mortality
levels are generally high in the lower tributary reaches where water
temperatures and fish densities are generally the highest.  Areas
immediately downstream of high head dams may also be subject to high
levels of total dissolved gas (TDG).  The continued placement of natural
origin Chinook salmon and steelhead above the barrier dam at the Minto
fish facility and into a short reach immediately below the Detroit/Big
Cliff Dam complex is a concern.  While this program does limit
hatchery-origin introgression and supports local adaption, at certain
times of the year water spilled over Detroit and Big Cliff dams has the
potential to produce high levels of TDG, which could affect a
significant portion of the incubating embryos, in-stream juveniles, and
adults in the basin, although the effect of this impact has not been
quantified.  The dates for establishing effective passage above USACE
high head dams (Big Cliff/Detroit, Green Peter, Cougar, Dexter/Lookout
Point, Hills Creek) in the Willamette are well behind the those
established in the 2008 BIOP (NMFS 2008), with current timetables
extending well into the 2020s.  In addition, passage at the Carmen-Smith
Dam on the McKenzie River is still in development.  Climate change
modeling predicts that in the absence of passage to colder headwater
areas some populations would be at a high risk of extinction by 2040
(Myers *et al.* 2018).  Restoration of access to upper watersheds
remains a key element in risk reduction for this ESU.  A second spatial
structure concern is the availability of juvenile rearing habitat in
side channel or off-channel habitat.  River channelization and shoreline
development have constrained habitat in the lower tributary reaches and
Willamette river mainstem, this is turn has limited the potential for
fry and subyearling "movers" emigrating to the estuary (Schroeder *et
al.* 2016).  

Although there has likely been a net decrease in the viability of this
ESU in recent years, with negative long-term trends for three of the
four populations for which statistics are available, the magnitude of
this change is not sufficient to suggest a change in risk category;
however, given increasing demands for land development and water
resources and the prospect of long-term climatic change, the inability
of many populations to access historical headwater spawning and rearing
areas may put those populations, and the ESU overall, at greater risk in
the near future.

## Upper Willamette steelhead DPS

### Brief description of ESU

The DPS includes all naturally produced anadromous *O. mykiss*
(steelhead) populations below natural and manmade impassable barriers in
the Willamette River, Oregon, and its tributaries upstream from
Willamette Falls to the Calapooia River (85 FR 81822, Figure 84).  Also
present in this DPS are non-native "early" winter-run steelhead, which
predominately spawn in westside tributaries, and non-native summer-run
steelhead that spawn throughout the eastside tributaries of the
Willamette Basin (Myers *et al*. 2006).  In addition, late winter
steelhead have been observed in the Willamette River, upstream of its
confluence with the Calapooia River, to the McKenzie River and Fall
Creek.  It is unclear where these fish originated from and whether they
constitute sustainable populations outside of the presumed historical
boundaries.

![](./media/media/image97.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure .  Map of the four demographically independent populations (DIPs)
in the Willamette River winter steelhead DPS.  Areas that are accessible
(green), accessible only via trap and haul programs (yellow), or blocked
(cross-hatched) are indicated accordingly. spawning and rearing areas,
illustrating populations and major population groups.  

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2005*

NMFS initially reviewed the status of the Upper Willamette River
steelhead ESU in 1996 (Busby *et al.* 1996), with an update in 1999
(NMFS 1999). In the 1999 review, the BRT noted several concerns for this
DPS, including relatively low abundance and steep declines since 1988.
The previous BRT was also concerned about the potential negative
interaction between non-native summer-run steelhead and native
winter-run steelhead. The previous BRT considered the loss of access to
historical spawning grounds because of dams to be a major risk factor. 
The 1999 BRT reached a unanimous decision that the Upper Willamette
River steelhead DPS was at risk of becoming endangered in the
foreseeable future.

In the 2005 status update (Good *et al*. 2005), a majority (over 71%) of
the BRT votes for this DPS were assigned to the "likely to become
endangered" category, with small minorities in the "in danger of
extinction" and "not likely to become endangered" categories.  The BRT
did not identify any extreme risks for this DPS but found moderate risks
in all the VSP categories.  On a positive note, the 2005 BRT noted that
after a decade in which overall abundance (Willamette Falls count)
hovered around the lowest levels on record, adult returns for 2001 and
2002 were up significantly, on par with levels seen in the 1980s. 
Still, the total abundance was considered small for an entire ESU,
resulting in a number of populations that were each at relatively low
abundance.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) noted that since the 2005 BRT status update, Upper
Willamette steelhead initially increased in abundance but subsequently
declined to levels observed in the mid-1990s when the DPS was first
listed.  The DPS appeared to be at lower risk than the Upper Willamette
Chinook ESU, but continued to demonstrate the overall low abundance
pattern that was of concern during prior reviews.  The elimination of
winter run hatchery release in the basin reduced some risks, but
non-native summer steelhead hatchery releases were still a concern. 
Human population expansion within the Willamette Basin constituted a
significant risk factor for these populations.  Overall, the new
information considered in 2010 did not indicate a change in the
biological risk category since the time of the last BRT status review in
2005.

*2015*

The declines in abundance noted during the previous review continued
through the period 2010-2015 (NWFSC 2015).  There was considerable
uncertainty in many of the abundance estimates, except for perhaps the
tributary dam counts.  Radio-tagging studies indicate that a
considerable proportion of winter steelhead ascending Willamette Falls
do not enter the basins that were identified for this DPS; these fish
may be non-native early winter steelhead that appear to have colonize
the western tributaries, misidentified summer steelhead, or late-winter
steelhead that have colonized tributaries not historically part of the
DPS (Jepson *et al.* 2015; Johnson *et al.* 2021).  More definitive
genetic monitoring of steelhead ascending Willamette Falls in tandem
with radio tagging would be required to provide an estimate of
population abundance, as well as a total abundance for the DPS.

The release of non-native summer-run steelhead continued to be a
concern.  Genetic analysis suggested that there is introgression among
native late-winter steelhead and summer-run steelhead (Van Doornik *et
al.* 2015).  Accessibility to historical spawning habitat was still
limited, especially in the North Santiam River.  Much of the accessible
habitat in the Molalla, Calapooia, and lower reaches of North and South
Santiam rivers was considered degraded and under continued development
pressure.  Although habitat restoration efforts were underway, the time
scale for restoring functional habitat did not address the more
immediate risks to the DPS.

### Description of new data available for this review

### Abundance and productivity

Abundance and life history data for steelhead in the Upper Willamette
River DPS is very limited.  Consistent redd counts are available for
some index reaches, primarily in Thomas and Crabtree creeks, but these
do not provide population-level indicators of abundance.  Specific
research projects have been undertaken to estimate steelhead spawning
abundance and distribution (Mapes et al. 2017), but only in specific
basins and for a limited number of years.  Adult counts were also
available from observations at Willamette Falls, Bennett Dam and the
Minto Fish Facility (North Santiam River), and Foster Dam (South Santiam
River).  While steelhead counts at Willamette Falls provide a DPS-wide
estimate of abundance, there is some uncertainty in distinguishing
native late-winter steelhead from non-native early-winter steelhead and
unmarked non-native summer steelhead (Johnson *et al.* 2018; Weigel *et
al.* 2019).  Counts of steelhead in east-side tributaries provide more
population specific information on abundance.

### Willamette Falls

Winter steelhead counts at Willamette Falls provide a complete count of
fish returning to the DPS.  In the last five years counts of steelhead
at Willamette Falls experienced a marked decrease, with a record low
count in 2017 of 822 (Figure 85).  During the 2016-17 return year
pinniped predation at Willamette Falls became a concern.  Increases in
the pinniped population at the Falls, in conjunction with low steelhead
return, resulted in an estimated 25% predation rate on winter steelhead
(Steingass *et al.* 2019).  With the initiation of pinniped control
measures in 2019 and improvements in the steelhead run size, predation
levels fell to an estimated 8% in 2019 (Steingass *et al*. 2019). 
Overall, there was a 59% decrease in the geometric average for 2015-2019
relative to 2010-2014.  Abundances at Willamette Falls appear to have
recovered since the 2017 low, with a recent (unofficial) count of 5,510
winter-run steelhead.

### Molalla River

Population abundance estimates based on spawner (redd) surveys are only
available for the Molalla and associated tributaries (Pudding River,
Abiqua Creek) through 2018.  These estimates relied on a proportional
apportionment of winter-run steelhead counts at Willamette Falls based
on index redd counts in the four winter-run steelhead populations. 
Proportional allocation of Willamette Falls may be informative; however,
a comparison using radio tagged steelhead results (Jepson *et al.* 2013;
Jepson *et al.* 2014; Jepson *et al.* 2015), suggests that the
proportional assignment may overestimate abundance.  In either case
there is considerable uncertainty in the abundance estimates. 

### North Santiam River and Bennett Dams

Late-winter steelhead spawn throughout the North Santiam Basin except
for reaches above the Big Cliff/Detroit Dam complex.  Currently, the
best measure of steelhead abundance is the count of returning winter-run
adults to Upper and Lower Bennett dams.  Recent passage improvements at
the dams and an upgraded video counting system have contributed to a
higher level of certainty in adult estimates.  While there are steelhead
spawning below Bennett and some survey data is available for downstream
of upper and lower Bennett dams, it is likely that these dam counts
approximate the population run size.  The Bennett Dam counts may also
approximate spawner counts, given that post-dam prespawn mortality is
thought to be low for winter steelhead and the contribution of
non-native early winter run fish above the dams is also thought to be
low (Johnson *et al.* 2018).  Further, it should be noted that Johnson
et al. (2021) found that over half the unmarked juvenile steelhead
sampled [below]{.underline} Big Cliff Dam genetically assigned as
non-native early winter steelhead. The five-year geometric mean
(2015-2019) for the Bennett Dam counts is 514.  Sharpe and Mapes (2017)
found substantial differences in abundance estimates for winter-run
steelhead in the North Santiam River using index surveys, mark/recapture
with radio-tagged steelhead, and the Bennett Dam counts.  In light of
the uncertainty in abundance estimates for this population, the
calculation of short-term and long-term trends would convey an
unjustified precision.  In general, there has been long term decline in
the abundance of this population.

Figure .  Winter-run steelhead counts at Upper and Lower Bennett Dams in
the North Santiam River, 1998-2020.  Some steelhead spawning may occur
below the dams.  Data from
[[https://myodfw.com/upper-and-lower-bennett-dams-fish-counts]{.underline}](https://myodfw.com/upper-and-lower-bennett-dams-fish-counts).

### South Santiam River and Foster Dam

Survey data (index redd counts) is available for a number of tributaries
to the South Santiam River; in addition, live counts are available for
winter steelhead transported above Foster Dam.  Temporal differences in
the index reaches surveyed and the conditions under which surveys were
undertaken make the standardization of data among tributaries very
difficult.  In 2016 and 2017, there was a systematic monitoring of the
South Santiam River (Mapes *et al.* 2017).  Winter steelhead abundance
was estimated at 1,480±721 in 2016, and 157±60 in 2017 (the record low
year).  Further, Mapes *et al*. (2017) reported that there were
considerable differences between their abundance estimates for South
Santiam River tributaries and those generated using the existing index
reach based approach.  Therefore, longer time series are less
meaningful, in that abundance estimates before 2009 were developed using
index surveys to allocate Willamette Falls counts.  Finally, Foster Dam
counts reflect only a portion of the overall abundance, and the
proportion of winter steelhead ascending the ladder can vary from year
to year depending on water conditions.  Overall, index counts and Foster
Dam counts reflect the general trend of winter steelhead counted at
Willamette Falls.

### Calapooia River

There is a nearly complete and consistent time series for index reach
redd counts in the Calapooia River dating back to 1985.  While there is
not an expansion available from index reaches to population spawner
abundance, available estimates of winter steelhead redds/mile
demonstrate considerable resiliency.  Results for 2015 and 2016
generally reflect good ocean and freshwater conditions.  As with the
other DIPs in this DPS, measures of escapement were extremely low in
2018 and 2019, and likely in 2017 as well.  The improvement in index
counts for 2020 suggest reasonable underlying productivity.  By
comparison, radio-tag mark/recapture estimates for 2013, 2014, and 2015
were 127, 204, and 126, respectively (Jepson *et al.* 2015).  While no
quantitative estimate of population abundance is possible, it would
appear that the Calapooia River, on average, supports several hundred
spawners.

![https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/mIjh9W5ASrnztstslOco8nYsTyvbMso22jyiWSVKbaZvOmr8I6xlWXHm5mZJ4wCSkXKxR4Hps_gTbxYT9wApriTd9k73ZO3hgFWYpgofzU-rplPyBnW8xn46T679zxa8min7cg](./media/media/image98.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.0729166666666665in"}

Figure .  Calapooia River index reach estimates of winter steelhead
redds/mile from ground surveys conducted from 1985 to 2020.

![](./media/media/image99.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="2.676388888888889in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.  

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population    MPG       1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                  Change
  ------------- --------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Willamette              \(5619\)    \(3961\)    \(10293\)   \(5028\)    \(6431\)    \(2628\)    (-59)
  Falls Winter                                                                                    

  Calapooia R.  Cascade   149 (149)   219 (219)   406 (406)   214 (214)                           
  Winter                                                                                          

  Molalla R.    Cascade   1182 (1462) 726 (798)   1924 (1924) 1357 (1357)                         
  Winter                                                                                          

  N. Santiam R. Cascade   2495 (2928) 1953 (2388) 3333 (3423) 2500 (2500)                         
  Winter                                                                                          

  S. Santiam R. Cascade   1940 (1940) 1277 (1277) 2440 (2440) 1594 (1594)                         
  Winter                                                                                          
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Recent (2015-2019)5-year geometric mean of raw wild spawner
  counts for Puget Sound steelhead populations and population groups
  compared with Puget Sound Steelhead Recovery Plan high and low
  productivity recovery targets (NMFS 2019).  (SR) -- Summer run.  An
  "\*" indicates that the abundance is only a partial population
  estimate. Abundance is compared to the high productivity individual
  DIP targets.  Colors indicate the relative proportion of the recovery
  target currently obtained: red (\<10%), orange (10%\>x\<50%), yellow
  (50%\>x\<100%), green (\>100%).

### Harvest

There is no consumptive fishery for winter steelhead in the Upper
Willamette River.  Winter run steelhead in the Columbia River fishery
are intercepted at a low rate, 0.2% (ODFW and WDFW 2020).  Similarly,
due to differences in return timing between native winter-run steelhead,
introduced hatchery summer-run steelhead, and hatchery spring-run
Chinook salmon, the encounter rates for winter-run fish in the
Willamette River recreational fishery are thought to be low.  Tribal
fisheries occur above Bonneville Dam and do not impact Upper Willamette
River steelhead.

### Spatial structure and diversity

Winter-run steelhead hatchery programs were terminated in the late
1990s.  Currently, the only steelhead programs in the Upper Willamette
River release Skamania Hatchery-origin summer-run steelhead.  Annual
total releases for the entire Upper Willamette River (including the
McKenzie and Middle Fork Willamette rivers) have decreased slightly to
500,000 from (2015-2019).  Still, the legacy of previous hatchery-origin
releases persists in the Upper Willamette River.

A recent genetic study by Johnson et al. (2021) evaluated the level of
colonization by non-native stocks and introgression between non-native
summer run steelhead and non-native early winter run steelhead with
native late winter run steelhead. This work expanded upon the findings
of earlier work by Johnson et al. (2013) and Van Doornik et al. (2015),
but collected and analyzed juvenile *O.* mykiss. Johnson et al. (2021)
identified westside tributaries as being largely occupied by non-native
early winter run steelhead originating from releases of Big Creek
Hatchery (Lower Columbia River, Southwest Washington Steelhead DPS)
beginning in the 1920s. With the exception of the lower North Santiam
River, native late winter steelhead still predominant in eastside
tributaries north of the McKenzie River that drain the Cascades. Areas
above dams in the North and South Santiam rivers and in the Calapooia
River appear to have little influence from non-native introductions.
Below dams in the North Santiam River, pure non-native summer run and a
non-native Big Creek winter run steelhead were detected, as were hybrids
between non-native and native steelhead. Below dams of the South
Santiam, introgression from introduced steelhead was higher than in the
North Santiam, with 12% of the juveniles identified as summer run x
native winter run hybrids and 14% identified as hybrids of non-native
early winter x native late winter steelhead. In the Molalla River, the
predominant genotype was native winter run steelhead (40%), but a
substantial number of hybrids between the native and non-native
steelhead were detected. The presence of pure and hybrid summer-run
steelhead in the Molalla is surprising because summer run steelhead have
not been released in this basin since 1998. The establishment of feral
non-native summer and winter runs of steelhead poses a genetic risk to
the native populations. In addition, the presence of hatchery-reared and
feral hatchery-origin fish may affect the growth and survival of
juvenile late-winter steelhead.  

![](./media/media/image100.emf){width="5.861111111111111in"
height="4.347222222222222in"}

Figure . Annual releases of hatchery-origin (Skamania stock) summer-run
steelhead into Willamette River tributaries by subbasin.  Releases of
fish less than 2.5 grams are not included. All of these releases are
considered to be out-of-DPS origin.  Data from RMIS
([[http://www.rmpc.org/]{.underline}](http://www.rmpc.org/) accessed
April 23, 2020).

The exclusion of steelhead from headwater reaches in the North and South
Santiam rivers continues to be the primary spatial structure concern. 
Although the historical distribution of steelhead is not precisely
known, Mattson (1948) and Wallis (1963) indicate that the majority of
steelhead and salmon spawning occurred above the current site of Detroit
Dam in the North Santiam.  Similarly, in the South Santiam River, while
steelhead have access to habitat above Foster Dam in the upper South
Santiam, the Middle Santiam is blocked by Green Peter Dam.  Conditions
in the South Santiam River above Foster Reservoir may be limiting, due
to high (\>20°C) summer prespawning holding temperatures, and poor
incubation and rearing habitat conditions (the river is prone to scour
during flood episodes).  For example, 2010 was a poor year with scouring
floods during incubation. Alternatively, historical habitat (Quartzville
Creek and Middle Santiam River) above Green Peter Dam may provide better
spawning and rearing habitat than the upper South Santiam River,
previous surveys suggest that the Middle Santiam River and its
tributary, Quartzville Creek, were historically preferred steelhead
spawning habitat (Parkhurst 1950; Wagner 1963.).  Efforts to provide
passage for steelhead in the North Santiam are still at the planning
stage, and little effort has been allocated to providing passage at
Green Peter.  Foster Dam provides volitional downstream passage, but
juvenile and kelt survivals need to improve further to meet passage
criteria.  Smaller scale upstream and downstream passage issues exist
throughout the DPS, related in part to water withdrawal structures. 
While some of these have been addressed, others remain.

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

Populations in this DPS have experienced long-term declines in spawner
abundance.  The underlying cause(s) of these declines is not well
understood.  Returning adult winter steelhead do not experience the same
deleterious water temperatures as the spring-run Chinook salmon and
prespawn mortalities are not likely to be significant.  Although the
recent magnitude of these declines is relatively moderate, continued
declines would be a cause for concern.  Improvements to Bennett Dam fish
passage and operational temperature control at Detroit Dam may be
providing some stability in abundance in the North Santiam River DIP. 
It is unclear if sufficient high-quality habitat is available below
Detroit Dam to support the population reaching its VSP recovery goal, or
if some form of access to the upper watershed is necessary to sustain a
"recovered" population.  Similarly, the South Santiam Basin may not be
able to achieve its recovery goal status without access to historical
spawning and rearing habitat above Green Peter Dam (Quartzville Creek
and Middle Santiam River) and/or improved juvenile downstream passage at
Foster Dam.

While the diversity goals are partially achieved through the closure of
winter-run steelhead hatchery programs in the Upper Willamette River,
there is some concern that the summer-run steelhead releases in the
North and South Santiam rivers may be influencing the viability of
native steelhead.  Overall, none of the populations in the DPS are
meeting their recovery goals (Table 49).

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Abundance            
  --------- ---------------------------- -------------------- ------------
  Stratum   Population                   2015-2019            Target

  Cascade   Willamette Falls Winter      2,628                NA
            Count                                             

  Cascade   Molalla River Winter         NA                   3,000

  Cascade   North Santiam River Winter   NA                   8,358

  Cascade   South Santiam River Winter   NA                   3,913

  Cascade   Calapooia River Winter       NA                   498

                                         2,628                15,769
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log natural-origin spawner abundance
  computed from a linear regression applied to the smoothed
  natural-origin spawner log abundance estimate versus year. Only
  populations with at least 4 natural-origin spawner estimates from 1990
  to 2019 are shown and with at least 2 data points in the first 5 years
  and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

### Updated biological risk summary

Overall, the Upper Willamette River Steelhead DPS continued to decline
in abundance.  Although the most recent counts at Willamette Falls and
the Bennett dams in 2019 and 2020 suggest a rebound from the record 2017
lows, it should be noted that current "highs" are equivalent to past
lows.  Uncertainty in adult counts at Willamette Falls are a concern,
given that the counts represent an upper bound on DPS abundance. 
Radio-tagging studies suggest that a considerable proportion of "winter"
steelhead ascending Willamette Falls do not enter the tributaries that
are considered part of this DPS; these fish may be non-native early
winter steelhead that appear to have colonized the western tributaries,
misidentified summer steelhead, late-winter steelhead that have
colonized tributaries not historically part of the DPS, or hybrids
between native and non-native steelhead.  More definitive genetic
monitoring of steelhead ascending Willamette Falls in tandem with radio
tagging work needs to be undertaken to estimate the total abundance of
the DPS.

Introgression by non-native summer-run steelhead continues to be a
concern.  Genetic analysis suggests that there is introgression among
native late-winter steelhead and summer-run steelhead (Van Doornik *et
al.* 2015, Johnson *et al.* 2018, Johnson *et al.* 2021).  Accessibility
to historical spawning habitat is still limited, especially in the North
Santiam River.  Efforts to provide juvenile downstream passage at
Detroit are well behind the proscribed timetable (NMFS 2008), and
passage at Green Peter Dam has not yet entered the planning stage.  Much
of the accessible habitat in the Molalla, Calapooia, and lower reaches
of North and South Santiam rivers is degraded and under continued
development pressure.  Although habitat restoration efforts are
underway, the time scale for restoring functional habitat is
considerable.  While the risk level for this DPS has increased, the
recent improvements in abundance provide a demographic buffer to
extirpation.  Furthermore, increased monitoring is necessary to provide
quantitative verification of sustainability for most of the
populations.  In the absence of substantial changes in accessibility to
high quality habitat, the risk level for this DPS will remain at
moderate to high.  

# Oregon and Washington coast domain viability summaries

## Puget Sound Chinook salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU

The ESU includes all naturally spawning populations of Chinook salmon
from rivers and streams flowing into Puget Sound including the Strait of
Juan De Fuca from the Elwha River, eastward, including rivers and
streams flowing into Hood Canal, South Sound, North Sound and the Strait
of Georgia in Washington, as well as numerous artificial propagation
programs (85 FR 81822, Figure 89).  The Puget Sound Chinook salmon ESU
is composed of 31 historically quasi-independent populations, 22 of
which are extant (Ruckelshaus *et al.* 2006).  The populations are
distributed in 5 geographic regions, or major population groups (MPG's),
identified by the TRT (PSTRT 2002) based on similarities in
hydrographic, biogeographic, and geologic characteristics of the Puget
Sound basin.  

![](./media/media/image101.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Map of the Puget Sound Chinook salmon ESU's spawning and
rearing areas, illustrating populations and major population groups.  

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2005*

In the 2005 review (Good *et al*. 2005), the BRT concluded that,
overall, the status of natural spawning populations of Puget Sound
Chinook salmon was improved relative to the time of the previous status
review conducted with data through 1997 (Myers *et al*. 1998).  Also,
the overall trends in natural spawning escapements for Puget Sound
Chinook salmon populations estimated in 2005 remained similar to that
presented in the previous status review (data through 1997), with some
populations doing marginally better and others worse. 

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) concluded that all Puget Sound Chinook populations
were well below the TRT minimum planning range for recovery escapement
levels.  Most populations were also consistently below the
spawner-recruit levels needed for recovery.  The exceptions were the
Skagit system populations, which tended to have higher status.  The
Whidbey Basin MPG was also at relatively low risk.  The other four MPGs
were considered to be at high risk of extinction due to low abundance
and productivity values.  Their low numbers also contributed to poor
spatial distribution of spawners throughout the ESU.  Overall, the new
information on abundance, productivity, spatial structure and diversity
considered in the 2010 review did not indicate a change in the
biological risk category since the time of the last BRT status review in
2005.

2015

NWFSC (2015) concluded that all Puget Sound Chinook populations were
still well below the TRT minimum planning range for recovery escapement
levels.  Most populations were also consistently below the
spawner-recruit levels identified by the TRT as consistent with
recovery.  Across the ESU, most populations further declined in
abundance since the 2011 status review, and indeed, this decline had
been persistent over the previous 7 to 10 years.  Productivity remained
low in most populations.  Hatchery-origin spawners were present in high
fractions in most populations outside the Skagit watershed, and in many
watersheds the fraction of natural-origin spawner abundances had
declined over time. The original Puget Sound Chinook Recovery Plan
watershed chapters were completed in 2005
([[https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/resource/document/recovery-plan-puget-sound-chinook-salmon]{.underline}](https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/resource/document/recovery-plan-puget-sound-chinook-salmon)),
Habitat Monitoring and Adaptive Management planning documents were
completed in 2014 (https://www.psp.wa.gov/salmon-recovery-overview.php),
and along with a series of 3 and 4-year work plans, these documents
identify the habitat improvement projects planned and completed by the
16 watershed programs with the intention to help progress for Chinook
recovery in the ESU. There has been considerable variation in efforts
amongst watersheds and their plans, but generally the efforts have been
consistent and progressive through challenging funding cycles. In
addition, a number of the individual watersheds had begun the process to
update their original Recovery Plan Chapters
(https://www.psp.wa.gov/salmon-recovery-watersheds.php). The expected
benefits of these habitat improvement projects will take years or
decades to produce significant improvement in natural population
viability parameters.    Overall, the 2015 review concluded that new
information on abundance, productivity, spatial structure and diversity
since the prior review did not indicate a change in the biological risk
category.

### Description of new data available for this review

This status report incorporates "best available" Chinook salmon
population data through 2018, with data for some populations also
available through 2019. Spawning abundance data were obtained from
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) and the Puget Sound
tribes as a result of a request for data in the Federal Register, and
from individual comanager biologists and staff.  Updates for abundance,
age, and hatchery contribution data varied from population to
population, and were obtained from multiple sources, including the
annual postseason harvest reports provided by Washington Dept of Fish
and Wildlife (WDFW) and the Puget Sound Treaty Indian Tribes (PSTIT) 
(WDFW & PSTIT 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020) from the WDFW SaSI
database, and additional state hatchery data were queried from WDFW's
FishBooks database and provided by WDFW staff. Tribal hatchery data were
also provided by individual tribal staff.  Where data sources
conflicted, data were confirmed as much as possible, through
collaborative discussions with both Tribal and state co-managers. It is
important to note that data collection and analyses methodologies for
both hatchery and natural spawner abundances have changed in some
watersheds/populations over the course of the time series analyzed. This
creates some uncertainty and potential bias in the calculations of
trends.

This status review focuses on data starting in 1980, although some
populations have data going back much further. In addition to including
additional recent years of spawning data compared to the 2015 status
review, this report also incorporates updates and corrections made in
past escapement, age, and hatchery contribution data for many of the
populations. These corrections typically have been made by individual
tribal and/or state co-managers. These data updates and methods are
consistent with both the PSTRT's use for determining population
viability, and for prior NOAA status reviews. It is important to note
that opinions vary among co-managers regarding data quality, for
example, regarding estimates of hatchery contributions to spawning
grounds in years prior to mass marking.We continue to meet and
collaborate with co-managers regarding the development of a single data
set, but this data set is not yet fully validated nor agreed upon by all
co-managers. We encourage the co-managers to continue this effort and we
hope to help resolve the various needs for data management and reporting
in the very near future. Please see "Acknowledgements" in the beginning
of this document for a list of individuals who helped to improve and
validate the data set used for this analyses.

### Abundance and productivity

Abundance of the 22 extant natural spawning populations of Chinook
salmon in the Puget Sound ESU has varied considerably between
populations. Trends in abundance for individual populations are shown in
Figure 99. The populations, grouped by MPG and run timing (spring run,
summer run or fall run), include: Strait of Georgia MPG (North Fork
Nooksack and South Fork Nooksack), Whidbey Basin MPG (Lower Skagit,
Upper Skagit, Cascade, Lower Sauk, Upper Sauk, Suiattle, North Fork
Stillaguamish, South Fork Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Snoqualmie),
Central/South Puget Sound MPG (Sammamish, Cedar, Green, White, Puyallup
and Nisqually), Hood Canal MPG (Skokomish and Mid-Hood Canal), and
Strait of Juan de Fuca MPG (Elwha and Dungeness) (Ruckelshaus et al.
2006). The early run timing populations are North and South Forks
Nooksack, Cascade, Upper Sauk, Suiattle, in the Strait of Georgia and
Whidbey Basin MPGs and White River population in Central/South Puget
Sound MPG. Summer runs exist in the Upper Skagit, Lower Sauk,
Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and Dungeness, and all other populations are
fall runs. Newer genetics data have clarified that the two Stillaguamish
populations overlap in spawn timing and distribution, with both summer
and fall populations spawning in both forks of the Stillaguamish River
(WDFW & PSTIT 2020).

Total abundance in the ESU over the entire time series shows that
individual populations have varied in increasing or decreasing
abundance.  Several populations (North Fork and South Fork Nooksack,
Sammamish, Green, White, Puyallup, Nisqually, Skokomish, Dungeness and
Elwha) are dominated by hatchery returns.  Generally, many populations
experienced increases in total abundance during the years 2000-2008, and
more recently in 2015-2017, but general declines during 2009-2014, and a
downturn again in the two most recent years, 2017-2018 (Figure 90). 
Abundance across the Puget Sound ESU has generally increased since the
last status review, with only 2 of the 22 populations (Cascade and North
Fork and South Fork Stillaguamish) showing a negative % change in the
5-year geometric mean natural-origin spawner abundances since the prior
status review (Table 50). Fifteen of the remaining 20 populations with
positive % change in the 5-year geometric mean natural-origin spawner
abundances since the prior status review have relatively low natural
spawning abundances of \< 1000 fish, so some of these increases
represent small changes in total abundance. Given lack of high
confidence in survey techniques, particularly with small populations,
there remains substantial uncertainty in detecting trends in small
populations.  

Fifteen-year trends in log natural-origin spawner abundance were
computed over two time periods (1990-2005 and 2004- 2019) for each Puget
Sound Chinook population (). Trends were negative in the latter period
for 16 of the 22 populations and for four of the 22 populations (SF
Nooksack, SF Stillaguamish, Green and Puyallup) in the earlier period.
Thus there is a general decline in natural-origin spawner abundance
across all MPGs in the recent fifteen years. Upper Sauk and Suiattle
(Whidbey Basin MPG), Nisqually (Central/South MPG) and Mid-Hood Canal
(Hood Canal MPG) are the only populations with positive trends, though
Mid-Hood Canal has an extremely low population size. Further, no change
in trend between the two time periods was detected in SF Nooksack
(Strait of Georgia MPG), Green and Nisqually (Central/South MPG). The
average trend across the ESU for the 1990-2005 15-year time period was
0.03. The average trends for the MPGs are Strait of Georgia (0.03),
Whidbey Basin (0.04), Central/South (0.04), Hood Canal (0.03), and
Strait of Juan de Fuca (0.01). The average trend across the ESU for the
later 15-year time period (2004-2019) was -0.02. The average trends for
the MPGs are Strait of Georgia (-0.02), Whidbey Basin(-0.02),
Central/South (-0.02), Hood Canal (-0.02), and Strait of Juan de Fuca
(-0.08) (). The previous status review in 2015 (NWFSC 2015) concluded
there were widespread negative trends for the total ESU despite that
escapements and trends for individual populations were variable. The
addition of the data to 2018 now also shows even more substantially
either flat or negative trends for the entire ESU in natural-origin
Chinook salmon spawner population abundances.  

Chinook salmon productivity in the Puget Sound ESU across the time
period (1980-2018) has been variable. shows trends in productivity as
estimated by the log of the smoothed natural-origin spawning abundance
in year t minus the smoothed natural-origin spawning abundance in year
(t-4). Data below zero indicate that natural-origin spawners failed to
replace themselves, although in many cases total spawning abundance was
maintained through hatchery supplementation (compare red and black lines
in ). Across the Puget Sound ESU, 10 of 22 Puget Sound populations show
natural productivity below replacement in nearly all years since the
mid-1980's. These include the North and South Forks Nooksack in the
Strait of Georgia MPG, North and South Forks Stillaguamish and Skykomish
in Whidbey Basin MPG, Sammamish, Green and Puyallup in the Central/South
MPG, the Skokomish in the Hood Canal MPG, and Elwha in the Strait of
Juan de Fuca MPG. Productivity in the Whidbey Basin MPG populations was
above zero the mid-late 1990's, with the exception of Skykomish and
North and South Forks Stillaguamish populations. White River population
in the Central/South MPG was above replacement from the early 1980's to
2001, but has dropped in productivity consistently since the late
1980's. In recent years, only 5 populations have had productivities
above zero. These are Lower Skagit, Upper Skagit, Lower Sauk, Upper
Sauk, and Suiattle, all Skagit River populations in the Whidbey Basin
MPG. This is consistent with, and continues the decline reported in the
2015 Status Review (NWFSC 2015).

![](./media/media/image102.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="8.411805555555556in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

![](./media/media/image103.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="7.549019028871391in"}

Figure . Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of the
smoothed natural-origin spawning abundance in year *t* -- smoothed
natural-origin spawning abundance in year (*t* -- 4).

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Population**   **MPG**    **1990-1994**   **1995-1999**   **2000-   **2005-2009**   **2010-2014**   **2015-2019**   **%
                                                              2004**                                                    Change**
  ---------------- ---------- --------------- --------------- --------- --------------- --------------- --------------- ----------
  NF Nooksack R.   Strait of  51 (102)        95 (471)        229       275 (1536)      136 (1205)      137 (1553)      1 (29)
  spring           Georgia                                    (2186)                                                    

  SF Nooksack R.   Strait of                                  44 (87)   22 (41)         13 (35)         42 (106)        223 (203)
  spring           Georgia                                                                                              

  Low. Skagit R.   Whidbey    1332 (1474)     971 (1035)      2531      1916 (2228)     1416 (1541)     2130 (2640)     50 (71)
  fall             Basin                                      (2774)                                                    

  Up. Skagit R.    Whidbey    3970 (5603)     5641 (6185)     10723     8785 (10525)    7072 (7457)     9568 (10521)    35 (41)
  summer           Basin                                      (12410)                                                   

  Cascade R.       Whidbey    151 (188)       209 (213)       340 (371) 302 (342)       298 (317)       185 (223)       -38 (-30)
  spring           Basin                                                                                                

  Low. Sauk R.     Whidbey    384 (409)       403 (429)       820 (846) 543 (569)       376 (416)       635 (649)       69 (56)
  summer           Basin                                                                                                

  Up. Sauk R.      Whidbey    404 (408)       265 (267)       427 (427) 506 (518)       854 (880)       1318 (1330)     54 (51)
  spring           Basin                                                                                                

  Suiattle R.      Whidbey    288 (302)       378 (382)       402 (415) 258 (261)       376 (378)       640 (657)       70 (74)
  spring           Basin                                                                                                

  NF Stillaguamish Whidbey    731 (913)       677 (1177)      1089      493 (1262)      417 (996)       302 (762)       -28 (-23)
  R. summer/fall   Basin                                      (1553)                                                    

  SF Stillaguamish Whidbey    148 (185)       176 (305)       196 (280) 51(131)         34 (68)         37 (96)         9 (41)
  R. summer/fall   Basin                                                                                                

  Skykomish R.     Whidbey    \(2398\)        1497 (3331)     2377      2568 (3378)     1689 (2462)     1736 (2806)     3 (14)
  summer           Basin                                      (4849)                                                    

  Snoqualmie R.    Whidbey    \(963\)         1427 (1279)     2036      1308 (1621)     839 (1082)      856 (1146)      2 (6)
  fall             Basin                                      (2477)                                                    

  Sammamish R.     Central/   197 (576)       149 (564)       336       171 (1278)      82 (1289)       126 (879)       54 (-32)
  fall             South PS                                   (1031)                                                    

  Cedar R. fall    Central/   385 (562)       276 (497)       379 (646) 1017 (1249)     699 (914)       889 (1253)      27 (37)
                   South PS                                                                                             

  Green R. fall    Central/   2697 (5420)     3856 (7274)     2800      1305 (3149)     785 (2109)      1822 (6373)     132 (202)
                   South PS                                   (6542)                                                    

  White R. spring  Central/   269 (378)       242 (616)       1159      839 (2099)      652 (2161)      895 (6244)      37 (189)
                   South PS                                   (1461)                                                    

  Puyallup R. fall Central/   2146 (2547)     2034 (2348)     1378      1006 (2054)     450 (1134)      577 (1942)      28 (71)
                   South PS                                   (1794)                                                    

  Nisqually R.     Central/   610 (781)       577 (723)       689       551 (1899)      481 (1823)      766 (1841)      59 (1)
  fall             South PS                                   (1296)                                                    

  Skokomish R.     Hood Canal 505 (993)       478 (1233)      479       500 (1216)      136 (1485)      265 (2074)      95 (40)
  fall                                                        (1556)                                                    

  Mid-Hood Canal   Hood Canal 94 (120)        78 (103)        169 (217) 47 (88)         80 (295)        196 (222)       145 (-25)
  fall                                                                                                                  

  Dungeness R.     SJF        117 (117)       104 (104)       99 (520)  151 (374)       66 (279)        114 (476)       73 (71)
  summer                                                                                                                

  Elwha R. fall    SJF        428 (673)       275 (735)       491 (995) 140 (605)       71 (1349)       134 (2810)      89 (108)
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log wild spawner abundance computed from a
  linear regression applied to the smoothed wild spawner log abundance
  estimate versus year. Only populations with at least 4 wild spawner
  estimates from 1990 to 2019 are shown and with at least 2 data points
  in the first 5 years and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population               MPG               1990-2005      2004-2019
  ------------------------ ----------------- -------------- ---------------
  NF/MF Nooksack R. spring Strait of Georgia 0.07 (0.04,    -0.03 (-0.07,
                                             0.1)           0)

  SF Nooksack R. spring    Strait of Georgia -0.01 (-0.03,  -0.01 (-0.05,
                                             0.01)          0.03)

  Low. Skagit R. fall      Whidbey Basin     0.05 (0.02,    0 (-0.03, 0.03)
                                             0.08)          

  Up. Skagit R. summer     Whidbey Basin     0.07 (0.04,    -0.01 (-0.04,
                                             0.1)           0.02)

  Cascade R. spring        Whidbey Basin     0.06 (0.04,    -0.03 (-0.06,
                                             0.09)          -0.01)

  Low. Sauk R. summer      Whidbey Basin     0.04 (0.01,    -0.01 (-0.05,
                                             0.08)          0.02)

  Up. Sauk R. spring       Whidbey Basin     0.01 (-0.02,   0.07 (0.04,
                                             0.05)          0.1)

  Suiattle R. spring       Whidbey Basin     0.01 (-0.01,   0.05 (0.01,
                                             0.03)          0.08)

  NF Stillaguamish R.      Whidbey Basin     0.02 (-0.01,   -0.06 (-0.1,
  summer/fall                                0.05)          -0.02)

  SF Stillaguamish R.      Whidbey Basin     -0.01 (-0.04,  -0.08 (-0.13,
  summer/fall                                0.02)          -0.03)

  Skykomish R. summer      Whidbey Basin     0.05 (0.01,    -0.05 (-0.08,
                                             0.09)          -0.02)

  Snoqualmie R. fall       Whidbey Basin     0.08 (0.05,    -0.05 (-0.08,
                                             0.12)          -0.02)

  Sammamish R. fall        Central/South PS  0.06 (0.02,    -0.04 (-0.1,
                                             0.1)           0.02)

  Cedar R. fall            Central/South PS  0.02 (-0.03,   0 (-0.02, 0.03)
                                             0.07)          

  Green R. fall            Central/South PS  -0.01 (-0.05,  -0.01 (-0.06,
                                             0.02)          0.03)

  White R. spring          Central/South PS  0.15 (0.11,    -0.02 (-0.05,
                                             0.18)          0.01)

  Puyallup R. fall         Central/South PS  -0.01 (-0.03,  -0.06 (-0.1,
                                             0.01)          -0.03)

  Nisqually R. fall        Central/South PS  0.03 (0, 0.05) 0.03 (-0.02,
                                                            0.07)

  Skokomish R. fall        Hood Canal        0.02 (-0.02,   -0.09 (-0.14,
                                             0.05)          -0.03)

  Mid-Hood Canal fall      Hood Canal        0.04 (0.01,    0.06 (0, 0.11)
                                             0.07)          

  Dungeness R. summer      Strait of Juan de 0.01 (-0.02,   -0.04 (-0.08,
                           Fuca              0.03)          -0.01)

  Elwha R. late            Strait of Juan de 0 (-0.04,      -0.11 (-0.17,
                           Fuca              0.04)          -0.04)
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Five-year mean of fraction natural origin spawners (sum of
  all estimates divided by the number of estimates). 

### Harvest

Puget Sound Chinook are harvested in ocean salmon fisheries, in Puget
Sound fisheries, and in terminal fisheries in the rivers. They migrate
to the north, so for most of Puget Sound Chinook populations, nearly all
of the ocean fishery impacts occur in Canada and Alaska where they are
subject to the Pacific Salmon Treaty. Some populations are also
harvested at lower rates in the coastal fisheries off Washington and
Oregon. Fisheries within Puget Sound are managed by the state and tribal
co- managers under a resource management plan. Fishery impact rates vary
considerably among MPGs within Puget Sound primarily because of
different terminal area management and variable exploitation rates in
the Canadian and Alaskan fisheries. For populations in the Hood Canal
MPG (Skokomish) and Central/South Sound MPG (Nisqually, White, Puyallup,
Green) substantial terminal area fisheries are directed at hatchery fish
that are produced largely to support tribal and recreational fisheries.
For populations in the Whidbey Basin MPG (Skokomish, Stillaguamish, and
Skagit Rivers) and the Strait of Georgia MPG (Nooksack), harvest in the
northern fisheries accounts for a large portion of the exploitation.

Chinook populations in Puget Sound generally show a similar pattern of
declining exploitation rates in the 1990s and relatively
stable-to-increasing exploitation rates since then (Figure 92).  This is
primarily a result of Canadian interceptions of Puget Sound Chinook off
the West Coast of Vancouver Island (WCVI).  During the 1990s Canada
sharply reduced fisheries off WCVI in response to depressed domestic
stocks.  Since then, WCVI stock status has improved somewhat and
Canadian managers have changed the temporal pattern of fishing to avoid
WCVI stocks.  This has resulted in increased impacts on Puget Sound
stocks.  A notable exception to this pattern is the North Puget Sound
region (Nooksack, Skagit, Stillaguamish).  These stocks migrate through
the Strait of Georgia.  Canadian stocks in the Strait of Georgia have
not recovered and most fisheries in Canadian inside waters for Chinook
and coho salmon have been shut down.  

The Pacific Salmon Treaty Chinook agreement which took effect in 2009
included 30% reductions in Chinook catch ceilings off WCVI, and 15%
reductions in southeast Alaska. The Treaty was revised again in 2018 and
a new ten- year agreement (2019-2028) now specifies further reductions
in these catch ceilings at low abundances. Since the 1999 PST Chinook
agreement, an abundance-based Chinook management regime, under which
fisheries are classified as either aggregate abundance-based management
(AABM) or individual stock-based management (ISBM) regimes has been in
place. AABM fisheries constrain catch to a numerical limit computed from
either a pre- season forecast or an in-season estimate of abundance;
ISBM fisheries constrain annual impacts, within the fisheries of a
jurisdiction, for a naturally spawning Chinook salmon stock or stock
group (Pacific Salmon Commission 2020). Goals of the new management
regime include, an abundance-based framework, an ability to respond to
significant changes in the productivity of Chinook salmon stocks, to
preserve biological diversity of the Chinook salmon resource, and to
contribute to restoration of depressed stocks (Pacific Salmon Commission
2020).

![](./media/media/image104.emf){width="6.013888888888889in"
height="3.8333333333333335in"}

Figure . Coded-wire tag-based exploitation rates for PSC Chinook
indicator stocks in Puget Sound. From Chinook Technical Committee 2020
Exploitation Rate Analysis, modified to account for mark-selective
fisheries in Puget Sound (Jon Carey, pers. comm., PSC CTC ERA 2020).

### Spatial structure and diversity

Measures of spatial structure and diversity can give some indication of
the resilience of a population to sustain itself.  Spatial structure can
be measured in various ways, but here we assess the proportion of
natural-origin spawners (wild fish) vs. hatchery-origin spawners on the
spawning grounds.    

We can see a declining trend in the proportion of natural-origin
spawners across the ESU starting approximately in 1990 and extending
through the present (2018).  Figure 93 shows the smoothed trends in the
estimated fraction of the natural spawning populations that consist of
natural--origin spawners.  The populations with the highest fractions of
natural-origin spawners across the entire 1980 to 2018 time period are
the six Skagit River populations. The Skykomish, Snoqualmie and Cedar
populations had lower proportion of natural-origin spawners in the late
1990s, but they have rebounded and stayed between 60-90% since the early
2000s.  All other populations vary considerably across the whole time
period. A number of populations (North and South Forks Nooksack, North
and South Forks Stillaguamish, Skykomish, Snoqualmie, White, Puyallup,
Nisqually, Skokomish, Dungeness and Elwha) show recent declining trends
in the fraction natural-origin estimates.   

Evidence of the decline in fraction natural-origin spawner abundance is
also shown in Table 52.  It is important to note that quality of
hatchery contribution data in the earlier time periods, prior to mass
marking programs, may be poor, so the long-term trends may lack accuracy
in the earlier years.  In the Whidbey Basin MPG, the fraction
natural-origin abundance has been consistently high in the six Skagit
River populations. With ongoing hatchery programs in the Stillaguamish
and Snohomish rivers there has been a decrease in five-year mean
fraction natural-origin in the last two time periods (2010-2014, and
2015-2019), particularly in the Stillaguamish.  Please note, the
fraction natural-origin estimates have been removed prior to mass
hatchery marking (pre-1997, and 2002-2005) in the Skykomish and
Snoqualmie populations data due to concerns by Tribal comanagers
regarding data quality.

However, the average five- year mean fraction natural-origin estimates
for the entire Whidbey Basin MPG remains relatively consistent across
all time periods. The Strait of Georgia MPG (North and South Forks
Nooksack) has had increased hatchery influence since the late 1990s and
across all time periods. The South Fork Nooksack population has had
extremely small wild fish returns through 2015, but have had increased
numbers of natural-origin spawners in the last three years relative to
increased supplementation program efforts conducted at Skookum Hatchery
(WDFW and PSTIT 2020). This population is at high risk of extinction.
The Central/South MPG has had decreasing fraction natural-origin
estimates in the Sammamish, Green, White, and Puyallup populations, and
increases in the Cedar population in the recent three five-year time
periods (2005-2009, 2010-2014, 2015-2019) (Figure 93, Table 52).  The
Nisqually population data here represents the total volitional
escapement, but in three most recent years a supplementation program has
been instituted with trucking hatchery fish upstream for release on the
spawning grounds.  This is an effort to supplement natural spawning.  
In the Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca MPGs, three of four
populations had declining five-year mean fraction natural-origin
estimates of fish returns to the spawning grounds.  Skokomish had a
slight increase in the most recent five-year time period, but still very
low fraction natural-origin for the population. This population is
heavily impacted by the George Adams hatchery program.  Mid-Hood Canal
population had a higher five-year mean fraction wild estimate in the
most recent time period (2014-2019) because the hatchery supplementation
program was ended in the Hamma Hamma River in 2015.  Some
supplementation fish continued to return through 2019, however, the
population has not proven to be self-sustaining and viable and recent
returns have been very low (Susewind 2020).  Genetics data show this
population highly correlated to the George Adams Hatchery stock, and the
Green River stock that has been used. State managers conclude from the
long-term supplementation program and the genetics composition that if
there was an independent population of Chinook salmon that utilized the
mid-Hood Canal streams, then it is most certainly extinct at this point
in time.    Thus, considering populations by MPG, the Whidbey Basin MPG
is the only MPG with consistently high fraction natural-origin spawner
abundance, in 6 of 10 populations.  All other MPG's have either variable
or declining spawning populations that have high proportions of
hatchery-origin spawners.

![](./media/media/image105.png){width="5.83in" height="7.55in"}

Figure .  Smoothed trend in estimated fraction of natural-origin spawner
abundances (blue line), and annual raw fraction of wild estimates
(points).

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population              1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ----------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  NF Nooksack R. spring   0.28        0.11        0.19        0.14        0.13

  SF Nooksack R. spring   0.26        0.55        0.57        0.42        0.45

  Low. Skagit R. fall     0.94        0.91        0.86        0.92        0.84

  Up. Skagit R. summer    0.91        0.87        0.84        0.95        0.91

  Cascade R. spring       0.98        0.92        0.89        0.94        0.86

  Low. Sauk R. summer     0.94        0.97        0.95        0.91        0.98

  Up. Sauk R. spring      0.99        1.00        0.98        0.97        0.99

  Suiattle R. spring      0.99        0.97        0.99        0.99        0.97

  NF Stillaguamish R.     0.59        0.70        0.40        0.43        0.45
  summer/fall                                                             

  SF Stillaguamish R.     0.59        0.70        0.40        0.54        0.46
  summer/fall                                                             

  Skykomish R. summer     0.49        0.52        0.76        0.69        0.62

  Snoqualmie R. fall      0.81        0.89        0.81        0.78        0.75

  Sammamish R. fall       0.29        0.36        0.16        0.07        0.16

  Cedar R. fall           0.61        0.59        0.82        0.78        0.71

  Green R. fall           0.55        0.47        0.43        0.39        0.30

  White R. spring         0.54        0.79        0.43        0.32        0.15

  Puyallup R. fall        0.88        0.79        0.52        0.41        0.32

  Nisqually R. fall       0.80        0.61        0.30        0.30        0.47

  Skokomish R. fall       0.40        0.46        0.45        0.10        0.16

  Mid-Hood Canal fall     0.76        0.79        0.61        0.33        0.89

  Dungeness R. summer     1.00        0.32        0.43        0.25        0.25

  Elwha R. fall           0.41        0.53        0.35        0.06        0.05
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . Seven ecological diversity groups as proposed by the PSTRT
  for the Hood Canal Summer Chum ESU by geographic region and associated
  spawning aggregation. (From Sands et al. 2009).

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

The Puget Sound TRT provided viability criteria for each population
based on historical information and models with which they developed
planning ranges for spawner abundance and productivity (PSTRT 2002).
They also specified spatial structure and diversity criteria
characteristic of low risk populations.  The planning ranges are based
on estimates of salmon abundance that can be supported by properly
functioning habitat at both low productivity and high productivity. They
also recommended ESU-level criteria including: the viability status of
all populations in the ESU is improved from current conditions, that 2
to 4 Chinook populations in each of the 5 MPG's within the ESU achieve
viability, at least 1 population is viable from each major genetic and
life history group historically present within each of the 5 MPGs, and
that the populations that do not meet the viability criteria for all 4
VSP parameters are sustained in order to provide ecological functions
and preserve options for ESU recovery.  Additional criteria described
habitat conditions that are needed to support viable salmonid
populations.

In the Puget Sound Chinook salmon ESU, multiple populations were
designated in some river systems.  Generally speaking, the data
available at that time (including both genetic and spawner abundance led
the TRT to identify some populations based on geographic location of
spawning areas.  Over the past 15+ years, co-managers have vastly
increased the amount and quality of both spawner abundance by area and
genetic structure.  In a number of river systems, populations that were
thought to be geographically isolated have been documented to stray more
widely than previously thought (Table 53). Hence we identify these below
and give a brief description of each concern relative to management and
listing/delisting status. In two cases, Mid-Hood Canal and
Sammamish/Cedar, state and tribal co-managers submitted letters to NOAA
to consider a formal change in the population identification
(Muckleshoot Indian Tribe 2020; Point No Point Treaty Council 2020;
Susewind 2020). 

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ESU/DPS    Population(s)    Issue
  ---------- ---------------- ---------------------------------------------
  Puget      Mid-Hood Canal   Did the three streams over which this
  Sound                       population is designated historically support
  Chinook                     Chinook salmon?
  Salmon                      

             Stillaguamish,   Difference is run timing, not geography
             North Fork and   
             South Fork       

             Nooksack, North  Difference is run timing, not geography
             Fork and South   
             Fork             

             Sammamish (and   Was this river capable of supporting a
             Cedar)           self-sustaining population

             Puyallup and     Difference is run timing, not geography
             White            

             Lake Cushman     Not currently considered a native remnant or
             "adfluvial"      viable independent population. Any reason to
             Chinook          update in light of Brenkman 2017, recent
                              genetic samples from Tacoma Power, and new
                              passage facilities in operation?
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table \-- Lake Ozette and Umbrella Creek sockeye abundance.

#### Mid-Hood Canal

Washington State and Tribal fishery co-managers have submitted updated
information, with a request from WDFW managers for the Mid-Hood Canal
Chinook population to be considered as "not an independent population"
and as extinct, and a request from PNPTC managers to abstain from such a
decision until an ongoing habitat assessment and consideration of a
"reintroduction/supplementation program of an appropriate locally
adapted natural spawning population" is fully . This would likely be a
spring-run Chinook population, rather than the current fall-run
population. Both State and Tribal co-managers consider that all of the
spawning 'aggregations' that currently exist in the Duckabush,
Dosewallips, and Hamma Hamma rivers are not sustainable populations nor
independent genetically from the current day Skokomish River population,
which is heavily supplemented with Green River fish propagated at George
Adams Hatchery.

In Ruckelshaus et al. (2006), the TRT offered several alternative
population structures for the Mid-Hood Canal population from 3 separate
populations (adopted) to Mid-Hood Canal as a subpopulation of a larger
Hood Canal population. In the end, the TRT determined that based on
historical accounts of Chinook salmon presence, combined with the lack
of substantive artificial production (at the time) and the location of
the small systems from the nearest major populations (Skokomish and
Dungeness), there was a high likelihood that an independent population
was historically present in the Mid-Hood Canal systems, in aggregate.
See pages 54-57 in Ruckelshaus et al. (2006). 

The co-managers provide evidence of spawner abundances and genetic
analyses that indicate: 1) the 20 year-long supplementations program,
ended in 2015, has not produced a sustainable naturally producing
Chinook population, and 2) genetic analyses of the existing Mid-Hood
Canal Chinook population indicates genetic similarity to the Skokomish
population, including the Green River stock that are used for the George
Adams hatchery program (Susewind 2020).  The viability parameters of
spatial structure and diversity are also discussed above.  Recent low
spawner abundances despite increased fraction wild estimates in 2018 and
2019 indicate the population cannot be sustained without
supplementation.  WDFW managers do mention their intention to continue
to support habitat restoration and a second attempt to reintroduce
Chinook salmon, but of a different brood stock than the previously used
Green River/George Adams/Hoodsport stock.  The WDFW managers express
concern that this population has listing status as "necessary to achieve
recovery" for the ESU (i.e. 2-4 populations per MPG) (Susewind 2020).
However, the Tribal managers express concern that any potential change
in listing status should more broadly consider harvest, habitat, and
genetic diversity parameters that they believe have not yet adequately
been identified. In particular, they suggest attempting to reintroduce a
locally adapted spring-run population if an ongoing analysis of habitat
information is determined to support such a population (Point No Point
Treaty Council 2020).

#### Sammamish

Tribal fishery managers (Muckelshoot Indian Tribe) have also submitted
updated information and a request for the Sammamish Chinook population
to be considered as "not an independent population" and as not distinct
from the Cedar River population. They provide information that any of
the spawning 'aggregations' that previously existed in the Sammamish and
Issaquah watersheds have been heavily populated by hatchery strays for
many years and current spawners cannot be differentiated from Issaquah
Creek hatchery or the Cedar River population.  Productivity of
natural-origin spawner returns indicates that a wild population is not
able to persist without the hatchery influence primarily due to poor
spawning and rearing habitat in the Sammamish River and its tributaries
(Muckleshoot Indian Tribe 2020).

#### Stillaguamish, Nooksack, White and Puyallup Rivers

State and Tribal co-managers have done considerable genetic
mark-recapture work in the Stillaguamish River, North and South forks
Chinook populations, over the past decade.  They have determined that
the previously identified "North Fork" and South Fork" populations are
not in fact geographically isolated as determined in Ruckelshaus et al.
(2006).  Their data do confirm the presence of two populations of
Chinook distinguished by genetic characteristics that are expressed in
run timing, summers and falls (WDFW and PSTIT 2020).  However the two
populations have been determined to overlap in spawn timing and
distribution so that both populations spawn in both North and South
Forks Stillaguamish River. Escapement is still currently estimated for
the geographic units rather than for the individual populations (WDFW
and PSTIT 2020). 

A similar situation exists in the Nooksack River, North/Middle Forks and
South Fork populations, and also in the Puyallup and White Rivers. The
TRT previously considered the North/Middle Forks and South Fork two
populations (both early run-types) that are geographically isolated, but
more concerted efforts to obtain spawner abundance data and carcass
samples for genetic analyses have allowed more accurate delineation of
the genetic makeup of each spawning aggregate.  The White River was
determined to have an early run Chinook salmon population that is
distinct from the late run population that remained lower in the system
in the White River below the diversion dam and in the Puyallup River. 
Co-managers have done substantial work to obtain more detailed and
consistent spawner abundance data and to be able to determine the
different components of the populations and their spawning locations. 
In all cases, data 10-15 years back in time have been re-analyzed and
re-tabluated relative to our past data reviews.  The new information
typically is also used to inform recovery efforts, as well as, fishery
management decisions, for these populations somewhat differently than
previously designated by the TRT in Ruckelshaus et al. (2006).

While these new data do now exist, they do not change considerations of
listing status in this status review document. We acknowledge the
co-managers request to reassess and revise the Mid-Hood Canal Chinook
population status determination, including differences in opinions for
possible solutions. We also commend the co-managers efforts and
successes to develop better abundance, productivity, genetic diversity
and spatial structure data. A possible approach for which to address
these issues would be to convene a technical team and possibly consider
the revision of the Puget Sound Chinook recovery plan. Otherwise, review
of the overall plan and ESU recovery goals is necessary, particularly as
regards consideration of the spatial structure and diversity viability
parameters, and specifically relative to the number of populations in
each MPG necessary for recovery. Also revision of the associated
watershed chapters is necessary to describe updated population and
habitat information, as well as, strategies and actions necessary to
achieve Chinook recovery in all MPGs of the Puget Sound ESU.

### Updated biological risk summary

> All Puget Sound Chinook salmon populations continue to remain well
> below the TRT planning ranges for recovery escapement levels. Most
> populations also remain consistently below the spawner-recruit levels
> identified by the TRT as necessary for recovery. Across the ESU, most
> populations have increased somewhat in abundance since the last status
> review in 2016, but have small negative trends over the past 15 years.
> Productivity remains low in most populations. Hatchery-origin spawners
> are present in high fractions in most populations outside the Skagit
> watershed, and in many watersheds the fraction of spawner abundances
> that are natural-origin have declined over time. Habitat protection,
> restoration and rebuilding programs in all watersheds have improved
> stream and estuary conditions despite record numbers of humans moving
> into the Puget Sound region in the past two decades. Bi-annual four
> year work plans document the many completed habitat actions that were
> initially identified and in the Puget Sound Chinook salmon recovery
> plan. The expected benefits will take years or decades to produce
> significant improvement in natural population viability parameters.
> Development of a monitoring and adaptive management program was
> required by NMFS in the 2007 Supplement to the Shared Strategy
> Recovery Plan, and since the last review the Puget Sound Partnership
> has completed this, but this program is still not fully functional for
> providing assessment of watershed habitat restoration/recovery
> programs, nor of fully integrating the essentially discrete habitat,
> harvest and hatchery programs. A recent white paper produced by the
> Salmon Science Advisory Group, of the Puget Sound Partnership
> concludes there has been "a general inability of monitoring to link
> restoration, changes in habitat conditions, and fish response at
> large-scales" (Puget Sound Partnership 2021). A number of watershed
> groups are in the process of updating their Recovery Plan Chapters and
> this includes prioritizing and updating recovery strategies and
> actions, as well as assessing prior accomplishments. Overall, new
> information on abundance, productivity, spatial structure and
> diversity since the 2015 status review does not indicate a change in
> the biological risk category since the time of the last BRT status
> review.

## Puget Sound steelhead DPS

### Brief description of DPS

This report covers the Distinct Population Segment (DPS) of Puget Sound
steelhead (*Oncorhynchus mykiss*). These fish are the anadromous form of
*O. mykiss* that occur in rivers, below natural barriers to migration,
in northwestern Washington State that drain to Puget Sound, Hood Canal,
and the Strait of Juan de Fuca between the U.S./Canada border and the
Elwha River, inclusive (85 FR 81822, Figure 94). The Puget Sound
Steelhead Technical Recovery Team (TRT) considered genetic and
life-history information from steelhead on the Olympic Peninsula and
Washington coast and concluded that there was no compelling evidence to
alter the DPS boundary described above.  

![](./media/media/image106.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Map of the Puget Sound Steelhead DPS's spawning and rearing
areas, identifying 32 demographically independent populations (DIPs)
within 3 major population groups (MPGs).  The 3 steelhead MPGs are
Northern Cascades, Central & South Puget Sound, and Hood Canal & Strait
of Juan de Fuca.  Areas where dams block anadromous access to historical
habitat is marked in red cross-hatching; and areas where historical
habitat is accessible via trap and haul programs is marked in yellow
cross-hatching. Areas where the laddering of falls has provided access
to non-historical habitat is marked in green cross-hatching. Finally,
historically inaccessible portions of watersheds are marked in grey and
white cross-hatching.  

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2007*

The initial review of this DPS---then designated the Puget Sound
Steelhead Evolutionarily Significant Unit (ESU)---by a Biological Review
Team (BRT) was completed in 1996 as part of a coastwide status review
conducted in response to two listing petitions received by NOAA that
identified other potentially imperiled steelhead populations in 1993 and
1994 (Busby *et al*. 1996). Subsequent to that BRT review, NOAA issued a
determination that listing of Puget Sound steelhead was not warranted
(61 FR 41451). In response to a petition to list Puget Sound steelhead
received in September 2004, a newly convened BRT completed its report
summarizing the status of the Puget Sound Steelhead DPS in June 2007
(Hard *et al.* 2007). The BRT considered the major risk factors facing
Puget Sound steelhead to be widespread declines in abundance and
productivity for most natural populations in the DPS (including those in
Skagit and Snohomish rivers, previously considered strongholds for
steelhead in Puget Sound); the low abundance of all summer-run
populations; and continued releases of out-of-DPS hatchery fish from
Skamania River-derived summer-run and highly domesticated Chambers
Creek-derived winter-run stocks. Most of the populations in the DPS are
small, and recent declines in abundance of natural fish have persisted
despite widespread reductions in the harvest of natural steelhead in the
DPS since the mid-1990s. After considering these and other factors such
as reduced complexity of spatial structure, evidence for minor
contribution of resident *O. mykiss* to anadromous abundance and
productivity, and persistently low marine survival of steelhead from
Puget Sound, the BRT concluded that steelhead in the DPS were likely to
become at risk of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of
their range in the foreseeable future, but were not currently in danger
of extinction.  Subsequent to the BRT's review, NMFS issued its final
determination to list the Puget Sound Steelhead DPS as a threatened
species under the ESA on 11 May 2007 (72 FR 26722); the effective date
of the listing was 11 June 2007.

*2010*

The 2010 review of the listed Puget Sound Steelhead DPS concluded that
its status had not changed substantially since the 2007 listing (Ford
*et al.* 2011). Most populations within the DPS were showing continued
downward trends in estimated abundance, a few sharply so, and evidence
for low productivity was evident throughout the DPS. For all but a few
populations, population growth rates were declining on the order of 3 to
10% annually, and extinction risk for most populations over the
foreseeable future was estimated to be moderate to high, especially for
those in the Central & South Puget Sound and Hood Canal & Strait of Juan
de Fuca major population groups (MPGs). The major risk factors facing
Puget Sound steelhead had also not changed substantively since listing.
Following the 2010 status review, NMFS proposed critical habitat for
Puget Sound steelhead on 14 January 2013 (78 FR 2726); the agency
updated its determination of the listing status of the DPS on 14 April
2014 (79 FR 20802).

In 2013, the Puget Sound Steelhead TRT finalized its analyses of Puget
Sound steelhead data available through 2011 to identify 32
demographically independent populations (DIPs) and 3 MPGs within the DPS
(Myers *et al.* 2015) and develop viability criteria for the DPS (Hard
*et al.* 2015). In its viability report, the TRT concluded that the
threatened Puget Sound Steelhead DPS is not currently viable. The TRT
found that low population viability is widespread throughout the DPS,
across all three MPGs, and includes both summer-run and winter-run
populations.  Steelhead populations throughout the DPS showed evidence
of diminished abundance, productivity, diversity, and spatial structure
when compared with available historical evidence for the states of each
of these salmonid population (VSP) parameters.

*2015*

The 2015 status review concluded that the biological risks faced by the
Puget Sound Steelhead DPS have not substantively changed since the
listing in 2007, nor since the 2010 status review.   In a parallel risk
assessment process, the Puget Sound Steelhead TRT concluded that the DPS
was at very low viability, as were all three of its constituent MPGs,
and many of its 32 DIPs (Hard *et al.* 2015). Review of abundance trends
indicated some minor increases in spawner abundance or improving
productivity over the 2-3 years prior to the review; however, most of
these improvements were small and abundance and productivity throughout
the DPS remained at levels of concern for demographic risk. Recent
increases in abundance that were observed in a few populations were
within the range of variability observed in the past several years.
Trends in abundance of natural spawners remained predominantly negative.
Particular aspects of diversity and spatial structure, including limited
availability of suitable habitat, were likely to be limiting the
viability of most Puget Sound steelhead populations. Reduced harvest and
declining hatchery production of both summer- and winter-run steelhead
in the DPS were determined to have decreased those risks to natural
spawners.

It was noted that the harvest levels for steelhead in Puget Sound were
at very low levels, and that further reductions were not possible or
would not significantly improve natural escapement.  At the time of the
review, environmental trends were not favorable to Puget Sound juvenile
and adult steelhead survival and the long term effects these conditions
were forecast to negatively affect abundance in to the near future. 
Specifically, the exceptionally warm marine waters in 2014 and 2015 and
warm stream temperatures and low summer stream flows observed during
2015 were unfavorable for marine and freshwater survival.  These and
other environmental indicators pointed to continued warming ocean
temperatures, fragmentation or degradation of freshwater spawning and
rearing habitat, reduced snowpack, altered hydrographs producing reduced
summer river flows and warmer water, and low marine survival for
salmonids in the Salish Sea. These conditions were expected to constrain
any rebound in VSP parameters for Puget Sound steelhead in the near
term.

### Description of new data available for this review

This report considers population data available through 2019 (where
available) to review the current status of Puget Sound steelhead.  These
data were provided by state and tribal comanagers, which included the
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW), including its Salmon
and Steelhead Stock Inventory and Salmonscape databases, and its
district area biologists; Washington tribal biologists; and Northwest
Indian Fisheries Commission (NWIFC) biologists.  In addition, there have
been a number of genetic studies related to Puget Sound steelhead
population structure and hatchery-origin steelhead introgression.  In
most cases, these studies have focused on the influence of non-native
hatchery releases on naturally-spawning populations (Warheit 2014;
Winans *et al.* 2017; Larson *et al.* 2018).  Results from a number of
ongoing studies focusing on juvenile survival in the Salish Sea have
been published since the last review.  WDFW also produced a Steelhead at
Risk Report (Cram *et al.* 2018), which reviewed many of the viability
factors discussed in the Status Review Updates.  This report focuses on
assessing DPS viability with a subset of the DPS for which updated
population data are available.  Only 20 populations or population groups
had sufficient data for statistical analysis.  Using the VSP approach,
this assessment includes a basic analyses of abundance and trend data
(Abundance and Productivity), in addition to Diversity and Spatial
Structure, but does not attempt to replicate the population viability
analyses (PVAs) conducted in the previous status review update (NWFSC
2015).  Additional analyses of Puget Sound steelhead population
demographics, distribution, and habitat is provided by the Puget Sound
Steelhead Recovery Plan (NMFS 2019b).   

### Abundance and productivity

The long-term abundance of adult steelhead returning many Puget Sound
rivers has fallen substantially since estimates began for many
populations in the late 1970s and early 1980s; however, in the nearer
term there has been a relative improvement in abundance and productivity
(Figure 95, Figure 96).  Of the 20 data sets analyzed, abundance trends
were available for 7 of the 11 winter-runs (WR) and only 1 out of the 5
summer-runs (SR) DIPs in the Northern Cascades MPG, 5 of the 8
winter-run DIPs in the Central & South Puget Sound MPG, and 7 of the 8
winter-run DIPs in the Hood Canal & Strait of Juan de Fuca MPG (Table
54).   A third of the number of populations lack monitoring and
abundance data, in most cases it is likely that abundances are very
low.  The data submitted only included natural-origin spawners,
therefore statistical analyses for natural spawners and total spawners
were identical.

### Northern Cascades MPG

Within the Northern Cascades MPG, over the last five years there has
been considerable variability in the performance of individual basins.
The winter-run populations in the Samish River and Bellingham Bay
Tributaries exhibited a 74% increase in the five-year geometric mean
abundance, with an average 1,305 natural-origin spawners for the present
review period (Table 54). Additionally, this estimate is an
underestimate as it does not include tributaries to Bellingham Bay.
Winter run DIPs in the Nooksack and Skagit basins exhibited slight
increases in their average five-year abundances, although within the
2015-2019 period a negative trend in abundances is evident in the Skagit
River populations (Figure 95).  The Skagit River data set, which
represents five DIPs[^6] and may include some summer steelhead red
counts, contains the majority of steelhead estimated in this MPG, with a
geomean of 7,181 (Table 54).  The Stillaguamish River winter run
steelhead DIP exhibited a moderate increase in its five-year geomean
abundance of 26% (Table 54), although the longer- term trend for this
population from abundance levels in the 1980s is strongly downward
(Figure 95).  Further, the Stillaguamish River abundance estimate is
based on an index rather than a total estimate. DIPs in the Snohomish
Basin, were stable or negative.  The Pilchuck River winter run DIP
experienced a 2% increase in five-year geomean, while both the
Snohomish/Skykomish and Snoqualmie River winter run DIPs both exhibited
29% decreases in recent five-year geomean abundances.  Long term trends,
15-year (2005-2019), were also significantly negative with 8% and 6%
annual declines for the Snohomish/Skykomish and Stillaguamish River
DIPs, respectively (Table 55).  

The Tolt River summer run DIP, the only summer run of five in this MPG
for which there was a long term data set, experienced a 63% decline in
five-year abundance during the 2015-2019 period.  In addition, there has
been a negative 4% trend in abundance since 2005.  The current five-year
geomean for the Tolt River DIP is only 40 spawners, although this
represents redds found in between RM 3.3 and 7.8.  There no data was
provided for the Drayton Harbor Tributaries winter run DIP and four
summer run DIPs, South Fork Nooksack, Deer Creek, Canyon Creek, and
North Fork Skykomish River.  It is assumed that these populations
persist, but at very low abundances.  

This MPG represents the majority of the abundance for the entire Puget
Sound DPS, with a total abundance (based on five-year geomeans) of over
10,000 natural spawners, with several populations having abundances over
a 1,000 and others over 250; however, over a third of the populations
are not sufficiently monitored to develop population abundance estimates
and likely have very low numbers of spawners.  Except for the Samish and
Bellingham Tributaries DIP and perhaps the Nooksack and Skagit rivers,
productivity (based on adult:adult ratios) for most populations was
negative (in contrast to the five-year geomean trends), suggesting a
downward trend into the near future (Figure 96).

![](./media/media/image107.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="8.411805555555556in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot. WR, winter run; SuR,
summer run.

![Multiple graphs showing the relative productivity of Puget Sound
steelhead populations from 1977 to 2016 for most populations.
Productivity is based on the average number of adult offspring a salmon
produces. Productivities are generally positive or neutral for most
populations, and negative for populations in the Snohomish/Skykomish,
Tolt, Eastside Hood Canal, Dungeness, and Strait of Juan de Fuca
Independent tributaries.](./media/media/image108.png){width="6.5in"
height="8.411805555555556in"}

Figure .  Trends in population productivity of Puget Sound steelhead,
estimated as the log of the smoothed natural spawning abundance in year
t minus the smoothed natural spawning abundance in year (t + 4). 

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population            MPG     1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                        Change
  --------------------- ------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Samish R./Bellingham  NC      316         717         852         535         748         1305        74
  Bay Tribs. W                                                                                          

  Nooksack R. W         NC                                                      1745        1906        9

  Skagit R. S and W     NC      7202        7656        5419        4677        6391        7181        12

  Stillaguamish R. W    NC      1078        1166        550         327         386         487         26

  Snohomish/Skykomish   NC      3629        3687        1718        2942        975         690         -29
  R. W                                                                                                  

  Pilchuck R. W         NC      1225        1465        604         597         626         638         2

  Snoqualmie R. W       NC      1831        2056        1020        1250        706         500         -29

  Tolt R. S             NC      112         212         119         70          108         40          -63

  N. Lake WA Tribs. W   SCC     60          4           \-          \-          \-          \-          \-

  Cedar R. W            SCC     241         295         37          12          4           6           50

  Green R. W            SCC     2062        2585        1885        1045        662         1289        95

  White R. W            SCC     524         311         301         173         514         451         -12

  Puyallup R. W         SCC     167         196         93          72          85          201         136

  Carbon R. W           SCC     \(969\)     \(800\)     \(335\)     \(246\)     \(290\)     \(735\)     153

  Nisqually R. W        SCC     1200        754         409         446         477         1368        187

  S. Hood Canal W       HCSJF   97          148         176         145         69          91          32

  Eastside Hood Canal   HCSJF   27          21          25          37          60          93          55
  Tribs W                                                                                               

  Skokomish R. W        HCSJF   385         359         205         320         533         958         80

  Westside Hood Canal   HCSJF               97          208         167         138         150         9
  Tribs W                                                                                               

  Dungeness R. S and W  HCSJF   356                                             517         448         -13

  Strait of Juan de     HCSJF   89          191         212         118         151         95          -37
  Fuca Independents W                                                                                   

  Elwha R. W            HCSJF                                                   680         1241        82
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year geometric mean of raw wild spawner counts. This is
  the raw total spawner count times the fraction wild estimate, if
  available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total spawner
  counts is shown. The geometric mean was computed as the product of
  counts raised to the power 1 over the number of counts available (2 to
  5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute the geometric mean.
  Percent change between the most recent two 5-year periods is shown on
  the far right.

#### Central and South puget sound MPG

Steelhead populations in the Central and South Puget Sound MPG exhibited
strongly positive increases in their five-year abundances.  Four
populations that represent the major basins in this MPG; Green River,
Puyallup River, White River, and Nisqually River winter-run DIPs
exhibited 94 to 187% increases in five-year abundances (Table 54).  Long
term (15-year) trends for three of these populations were positive,
White, Puyallup, and Nisqually, with annual growth rates of 6-8%,  while
the Green River DIP long-term trend remained stable at 0% (Table 55). 
Abundances for the White and Puyallup winter run DIPs remain in the low
hundreds and continue to be at some demographic risk, although estimates
include counts from only portions of the DIPs. Further, abundances for
the Puyallup/Carbon River DIP include data series for the Puyallup and
Carbon rivers that could not be combined due to differences in survey
protocols. Recent productivity for these four populations has been
predominately positive (Figure 96). Two DIPs in the Lake Washington
watershed, North Lake Washington Tributaries and Cedar River, had adult
abundances near zero, based on fish ladder counts (Chittenden Locks) and
Landsburg Dam (Cedar River) and redd counts; however, large numbers of
resident *O. mykiss* are found in the Cedar River (Cram *et al.* 2018). 
Lastly, no information was available for the East Kitsap Peninsula
Tributaries and South Puget Sound Tributary DIPs.  It is assumed that
these populations persist, but at very low levels.  Total abundance for
this MPG is still in the low 1,000s of fish.

#### Hood canal and the Strait of Juan de fuca MPG

In general, populations in this MPG have experienced an increase in
abundance during the 2015-2019 period.  The five-year geomean for the
Elwha River DIP increase to 1,241 winter run steelhead, an 82% increase
over the 2010-2014 period.  Productivity estimates for recent brood
years have also been strongly positive (Figure 96).  In addition, summer
run steelhead have been observed in the upper Elwha River, with recent
counts in the low hundreds of returning adults (Pess *et al.* 2020). 
Rather than a recolonization, these fish appear to be reanadromized *O.
mykiss* from summer run steelhead originally isolated behind the Elwha
and Glines Canyon dams.  Although summer run may also persist as
residents or at very low abundances elsewhere in the MPG, the Elwha
River population is the only extant summer run identified, and although
precise data on this "population" is lacking it represents a
considerable contribution to the DPS.  The Skokomish River winter-run
steelhead DIP exhibited a five-year geomean abundance of 958, an 80%
increase over the previous five-year period, and represents the second
largest DIP in this MPG (Table 54).  Further, both the long-term trend,
10% (Table 55), and recent productivity (Figure 96) are both strongly
positive.  The Dungeness River Summer and Winter DIP abundance was
estimated at 408; however this represented a 21% decrease over the
previous period (Table 54), longer term trends could not be calculated,
but the current abundance level is an improvement over estimates from
the 1990s.  The remaining populations consist of assemblages of small
tributaries with abundances of less than 250 individuals.  The three
Hood Canal winter run populations (Eastside Hood Canal, South Hood
Canal, and Westside Hood Canal) all experienced increases in abundance
from 9 to 55% (Table 54), but remain at relatively low population
abundances.  The Strait of Juan de Fuca Independent Tributaries winter
run DIP abundance fell below 100 for its five-year geomean, a 37%
decrease over the previous period.  Finally, no information was
available for the Sequim and Discovery Bay Tributaries winter run DIP. 
Based on previous monitoring in Snow Creek, a small tributary in this
DIP, overall abundance is unlikely more than 100.  Overall, this MPG
exhibited an increase in abundance related to the expansion of steelhead
spawning in the Elwha River and general improvements among populations
in Hood Canal.  Total abundance, however, was still low to moderate.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                        MPG     1990-2005       2004-2019
  --------------------------------- ------- --------------- ---------------
  Samish R./Bellingham Bay Tribs.   NC      0.04 (0.02,     0.05 (0.02,
  Winter                                    0.07)           0.08)

  Skagit R. Both summer & winter    NC      -0.03 (-0.04,   0.02 (0, 0.07)
                                            -0.01)          

  Stillaguamish R. Winter           NC      -0.07 (-0.09,   0.00 (-0.03,
                                            -0.04)          0.03)

  Snohomish/Skykomish R. Winter     NC      -0.05 (-0.07,   -0.09 (-0.11,
                                            -0.03)          -0.06)

  Pilchuck R. Winter                NC      -0.06 (-0.08,   0 (-0.03, 0.02)
                                            -0.03)          

  Snoqualmie R. Winter              NC      -0.04 (-0.06,   -0.07 (-0.09,
                                            -0.03)          -0.04)

  Tolt R. Summer                    NC      0.00 (-0.04,    -0.04 (-0.06,
                                            0.04)           -0.02)

  Cedar R. Winter                   SCC     -0.19 (-0.23,   -0.11 (-0.16,
                                            -0.14)          -0.06)

  Green R. Winter                   SCC     -0.03 (-0.05,   -0.01 (-0.06,
                                            -0.01)          0.03)

  White R. Winter                   SCC     -0.07 (-0.08,   0.07 (0.05,
                                            -0.06)          0.09)

  Puyallup R. Winter                SCC     -0.06 (-0.08,   0.07 (0.04,
                                            -0.04)          0.11)

  Nisqually R. Winter               SCC     -0.1 (-0.11,    0.08 (0.04,
                                            -0.08)          0.11)

  S. Hood Canal Winter              HCSJF                   -0.05 (-0.08,
                                                            -0.02)

  Eastside Hood Canal Tribs. Winter HCSJF   0.01 (0, 0.03)  0.04 (0, 0.08)

  Skokomish R. Winter               HCSJF   -0.06 (-0.07,   0.1 (0.08,
                                            -0.05)          0.13)

  Westside Hood Canal Tribs. Winter HCSJF                   -0.02 (-0.04,
                                                            0.00)

  Strait of Juan de Fuca            HCSJF   0.05 (0.01,     -0.04 (-0.07,
  Independents Winter                       0.08)           -0.01)

  Elwha R. Winter                   HCSJF                   
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends (slope) in log total spawner abundance
  computed from a linear regression applied to the smoothed total
  spawner log abundance estimate versus year. In parentheses are the
  upper and lower 95% CIs.

### Harvest

Harvest of Puget Sound steelhead is limited to terminal tribal net
fisheries and recreational fisheries. In response to declining abundance
throughout the 1990s, harvest rates were curtailed in 2003, with "wild"
harvest rates reduced to below 10% (NMFS 2018). Recreational fisheries
are mark-selective for hatchery stocks, but some natural origin
steelhead are encountered with a proportion of those fish subject to
hooking mortality and non-compliance. Hatchery steelhead production for
harvest is primarily of Chambers Creek winter-run stock (South Puget
Sound) and Skamania Hatchery summer-run stock, both of which have been
selected for an earlier run timing than natural stocks to minimize
fishery interactions. In tribal net fisheries, most indirect fishery
impacts occur in fisheries directed at salmon and hatchery steelhead.
Some additional impacts occur in pre-terminal fisheries, but these are
negligible and data are insufficient to attribute them to individual
populations. Consequently, harvest impacts are reported as terminal
harvest rates. 

Harvest rates differ widely among the different rivers, but all have
declined since the 1970s and 1980s. Harvest rates on natural steelhead
during the earlier period averaged between 10% and 40%, with some
populations in the central and south parts of Puget Sound, such as the
Green and Nisqually river populations, experiencing harvest rates over
60%. In recent years, terminal harvest rates have continued to decline,
averaging less than 2% over the last five years (Figure 97). In 2018,
NMFS approved a resource management plan (RMP) for the Skagit Basin that
allowed for the directed take of ESA listed steelhead through both net
fisheries and the catch-and-release recreational fishery (NMFS 2018).
Under this plan harvest rates would be based on overall escapement.

![https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/BBQ9LBx6bgjFsXZQThVs5TsmxyFwQHa6G_pRkM8iEWxNrI65y4bGqqIBZg5lWBpyWK6KSauUKwTfZ_B57XwfLw1TP21IKRCvA\_-2WD6mLR1KCN3B9HyvNUApKdars-\_pXXq51Q](./media/media/image109.png){width="6.0in"
height="3.8541666666666665in"} 

Figure . Tribal and non-tribal terminal harvest rate percentages on
natural-origin steelhead for five index steelhead populations in Puget
Sound 2001-2019.  Dotted blue line represents post Skagit RMP harvest
rates, which is a sliding scale regime based on pre-season terminal
escapement estimates to the Skagit River.  Dotted red line represents
the average harvest rates across the five populations through 2017, and
excludes Skagit for 2018 and 2019.  Data from (WDFW & PSIT 2016, 2017,
2018, 2019).

### Other Mortality factors

Steelhead juveniles emigrating from tributaries draining to the Salish
Sea face a host of potential predators.  Pearson et al (2015) reviewed
information related to avian and marine mammal species that may have
influenced the decline in Puget Sound steelhead populations.  Increases
in the abundance of marine mammals, such as harbor seals (*Phoca
vitulina*), or avian predators may be related to decreased juvenile
steelhead survival (Moore *et al.* 2015); tag studies estimated the
survival of wild steelhead from tributaries to the Pacific Ocean at only
16%.  Berejikian et al. (2016) further implicated harbor seals as a
factor in the poor survival of steelhead smolts in the Salish Sea.  A
mitigating factor in survival appears to be structures, such as the Hood
Canal Floating Bridge, that delay migration and make steelhead smolts
more susceptible to predation (Moore *et al.* 2010; Moore *et al.*
2013).  Genetic fitness, tributary-specific freshwater effects, and
distance traveled in the Salish Sea from tributary to ocean appear to be
factors influences survival (Moore & Berejikian 2017). In addition, the
introduction of freshwater piscivorous species (e.g. largemouth bass
(*Micropterus salmoides*), smallmouth bass (*Micropterus dolomieu*),
walleye (*Sander vitreus*), etc). may be limiting steelhead viability. 
Continued increases in the populations of predator species in
conjunction with declines in other forage fishes may further reduce the
survival of emigrating juvenile steelhead.

### Spatial structure and diversity

Abundance and productivity are demographic characteristics of a
population that determine its ability to persist into the foreseeable
future. Spatial structure and diversity, the other two VSP parameters
(McElhany *et al.* 2000), are characteristics that influence a
population's ability to persist and evolve over a much longer time
course.  Spatial structure and diversity consider a population's
identifying characteristics---such as utilization of habitat,
distribution of spawning aggregations, genetic and phenotypic traits,
life-history characteristics such as growth rate, frequency and
phenology of reproduction (seasonal run and spawn timing), and age
structure. Demographic risks due to low abundance and productivity are
typically shorter-term considerations for viability. Spatial structure
and diversity buffer a population against short term environmental
fluctuations and longe- term climatic change.  Compromised spatial
structure and diversity are ultimately expressed as longer-term declines
in abundance and productivity.

Diversity can be measured through a variety of life history trait
metrics, for example: age structure, run timing, spawning.  It is
difficult, however, to interpret the significance of changes in life
history traits under changing environmental conditions.  Indeed, the
responsiveness of life history traits to environmental change may be a
measure of adequate diversity. It is also unclear if the apparent loss
of a phenotype is merely an example of plasticity rather than the loss
of the underlying genetic diversity.  One of the few quantifiable risks
to diversity is the loss of locally-adapted traits through introgression
by non-native or domesticated hatchery-origin fish.

Abundance information provided for this update only included
natural-origin spawners, so we were unable to calculate the contribution
of hatchery-origin fish on the spawning grounds.  Moreover, information
on the proportion of hatchery-origin spawners (pHOS) is rarely obtained
in steelhead spawning surveys due to the near absence of carcasses (to
identify hatchery marks).  In those basins where hatchery-production
continues, the magnitude and origin of hatchery releases provides one
indicator of the potential risks to diversity.

The Recovery Plan for Puget Sound Steelhead (NMFS 2019b) recognizes that
production of hatchery fish of both run types---winter run and summer
run---has posed a considerable risk to diversity in natural steelhead in
the Puget Sound DPS. Because of the origin and aspects of the
propagation history of these fish in Puget Sound, the TRT (Hard *et al.*
2015) considered continued hatchery production of steelhead to represent
a major threat to the diversity VSP component for the DPS. Historically,
the majority of winter-run broodstocks produced in hatcheries in the DPS
were derived from the Chambers Creek stock (southern Puget Sound), which
is considered highly domesticated and has been selected repeatedly for
early spawn timing for decades, a trait known to be heritable in
salmonids (the natural population is now extinct); alternatively,
summer-run hatchery broodstock are derived from the long-running
Skamania Hatchery stock from the lower Columbia River Basin (i.e.,
out-of-DPS origin). In response to the risk of introgression between
native steelhead populations and hatchery-origin there has been a
general decrease in the overall production from several hatcheries.  In
addition, Chambers Creek releases were discontinued in the Elwha and
Skagit River basins during the last five-year period.  Chambers Creek
programs continue in the Dungeness, Nooksack, Stillaguamish, Snohomish,
and Skykomish river basins. Integrated hatchery programs have emerged in
place of many of the Chambers Creek programs, these programs incorporate
naturally-produced returning adults as broodstocks. Programs are
currently underway in the Elwha, Green, and White Rivers. It is planned
to discontinue the release of Skamania Hatchery-origin summer run
steelhead in the near future from the three programs currently
operating.  Additionally, there are plans to develop an integrated
hatchery broodstock using local summer-run steelhead; currently the plan
is to use unmarked summer-run fish returning to the South Fork Skykomish
River. The genetic status of naturally returning summer run fish to the
Skykomish River is currently being studied, and there will likely be new
information forthcoming to better understand the level of legacy
introgression by Skamania Hatchery summer run steelhead.

Overall, the risk posed by hatchery programs to naturally spawning
populations has decreased during the last five years with reductions in
production (especially with non-local programs) and the establishment of
locally-sourced broodstock (Figures 107, 108, 109, 110).  Unfortunately,
whereas competition and predation by hatchery-origin fish can be readily
diminished, it is unclear how long it will take to remove the genetic
legacy of introgression by natural selection. 

For spatial structure, the factors the TRT considered for influence on
viability included fraction of suitable rearing and spawning habitat
occupied by steelhead in the DPS (as measured by intrinsic potential, a
measure of historical production or capacity based on the relationship
between suitable habitat area and estimates of historical steelhead
density). 

![](./media/media/image110.emf){width="6.013888888888889in"
height="4.361111111111111in"}

Figure .  Releases of hatchery-reared winter-run steelhead into rivers
in the North Cascades MPG.  The majority of these releases are of
hatchery stocks not native to the receiving watersheds.  In addition,
releases of fish weighing less than 2.0 grams were not included.  Data
from Regional Mark Information System (RMIS:
[[https://www.rmis.org/]{.underline}](https://www.rmis.org/)) accessed 3
June 2020.

![](./media/media/image111.emf){width="6.013888888888889in"
height="3.361111111111111in"}

Figure .  Hatchery releases of winter-run steelhead into rivers of the
Central and South Puget Sound MPG from 1995 to 2019.  Portions of lines
that are dashed indicate that some or all of the fish released were
native to that population.  In addition, releases of fish weighing less
than 2.0 grams were not included.  Data from Regional Mark Information
System (RMIS:
[[https://www.rmis.org/]{.underline}](https://www.rmis.org/)) accessed 3
June 2020.

![](./media/media/image111.emf){width="6.013888888888889in"
height="3.361111111111111in"}

Figure .  Hatchery releases of winter-run steelhead into rivers of the
Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca MPG from 1995 to 2019.  Portions
of lines that are dashed indicate that some or all of the fish released
were native to that population.  In addition, releases of fish weighing
less than 2.0 grams were not included.  Data from Regional Mark
Information System (RMIS:
[[https://www.rmis.org/]{.underline}](https://www.rmis.org/)) accessed 3
June 2020.

![](./media/media/image112.emf){width="6.013888888888889in"
height="4.361111111111111in"}

Figure .  Hatchery releases of summer-run steelhead into Puget Sound DPS
rivers from 1995 to 2019.  All releases are from hatchery stocks that
were founded by out-of-DPS Skamania Hatchery summer-run steelhead. 
Intermittant releases into other rivers are not shown.  In addition,
releases of fish weighing less than 2.0 grams were not included.  Data
from Regional Mark Information System (RMIS:
[[https://www.rmis.org/]{.underline}](https://www.rmis.org/)) accessed 3
June 2020.

For spatial structure there were a number of events that occurred in
Puget Sound during the last review period.  While the completion of the
Elwha and Glines Canyon dam removals in 2014, occurred during the
previous period, the response of steelhead to this action is still being
evaluated.  It is clear; however, that steelhead are accessing much of
this newly available habitat (Pess *et al.* 2020).  Passage operations
have begun on the North Fork Skokomish River to reintroduce steelhead
above Cushman Dam, although juvenile collection efficiency is still
relatively low further improvements are anticipated.  Similarly,
improvements in the adult fish collection facility at Mud Mountain Dam
(White River) are near completion, with the expectation that
improvements in adult survival will facilitate better utilization of
habitat above the dam (NMFS 2014a).  The recent removal of the diversion
dam on the Middle Fork Nooksack Dam (16 July 2020) and the Pilchuck
River Dam will provide access to important headwater spawning and
rearing habitats. Similarly, the proposed modification of Howard Hanson
Dam for upstream fish passage and downstream juvenile collection (NMFS
2019a) in the longer term will allow winter steelhead to return to
historical headwater habitat in the Green River.  It has been
hypothesized that summer-run steelhead may have been residualized above
Howard Hanson (Myers et al. 2015), restoring access could restore such a
run. The effects of these two projects on abundances will not be evident
for some time.  Four of the top six steelhead populations identified by
Cram et al. (2018) as having habitat blocked by major dams are in the
process of having passage restored or improved.  While fish
passage/collection operations are currently underway in the Baker River
for sockeye, coho, and Chinook salmon, returning steelhead are not
currently transferred above the Baker River dams.  In addition, projects
focusing on smaller scale improvements in habitat quality and
accessibility are ongoing.  Some 8,000 culverts that block steelhead
habitat have been identified in Puget Sound (NMFS 2019b), with plans to
addressing these blockages being extended over many years.  Smaller
scale improvements in habitat, restoration of riparian habitat and
reconnecting side- or off-channel habitats, will allow better access to
habitat types and niche diversification.  While there have been some
significant improvements in spatial structure, it is recognized that
land development, loss of riparian and forest habitat, loss of wetlands,
demands on water allocation all continue to degrade the quantity and
quality of available fish habitat.

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

The Puget Sound Steelhead Recovery Team was established by NOAA
Fisheries and convened in March 2014 to develop a Recovery Plan for the
Puget Sound Steelhead DPS. This Recovery Plan was finalized in December
2019 (NMFS 2019b).  Recovery targets were calculated using a two-tiered
approach adjusting for years of low and high productivity.  Abundance
information is unavailable for approximately one-third of the DIPs,
disproportionately so for summer-run populations.  In most cases where
no information is available it is assumed that abundances are very low. 
Some population abundance estimates are only representative of part of
the population (index reaches, etc). Where recent five-year abundance
information is available, the 30% (6/20) at less than 10% of their High
Productivity Recovery Targets (lower abundance target), 65% (13/20) are
10%\<x,50%, and 5% (1/20) are 50%\<x\<100% (Table 56).  Although most
populations for which data is available experienced an improvement in
abundance during the last five years (Figure 95), significant increases
in abundance are necessary for all populations to reach even the High
Productivity (low abundance) Recovery Targets.  A key element to
achieving recovery is recovering a representative number of both winter-
and summer-run steelhead populations, and the restoration of viable
summer-run DIPs would appear to be a long-term endeavor.  Alternatively,
the relatively rapid reestablishment of summer-run steelhead in the
Elwha River does provide a model for potentially reanadromizing
summer-run steelhead residualized behind impassable dams. Another
diversity element factored into achieving recovery is the proportion of
hatchery-origin fish that spawn naturally.  Currently, the standard for
the proportion of non-native hatchery-origin fish on naturally spawning
grounds is 5%.

+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
| Major        | Demographically         | Recent    | Rec   |        |
| Population   | Independent Population  | Abundance | overy |        |
| Group        |                         |           | T     |        |
|              |                         | 2015-2019 | arget |        |
|              |                         |           |       |        |
|              |                         |           | High  |        |
|              |                         |           |       |        |
|              |                         |           |       |        |
|              |                         |           |       |        |
|              |                         |           | Low   |        |
|              |                         |           |       |        |
|              |                         |           | Pr    |        |
|              |                         |           | oduct |        |
|              |                         |           | ivity |        |
|              |                         |           |       |        |
|              |                         |           |       |        |
|              |                         |           | Pr    |        |
|              |                         |           | oduct |        |
|              |                         |           | ivity |        |
+==============+=========================+===========+=======+========+
| Northern     | Drayton Harbor          | NA        | 1,100 | 3,700  |
| Cascades     | Tributaries             |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Nooksack River          | 1,906     | 6,500 | 21,700 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | South Fork Nooksack     | NA        | 400   | 1,300  |
|              | River (SR)              |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Samish River &          | 1,305     | 1,800 | 6,100  |
|              | Independent Tributaries |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Skagit River            | 7,181     | 1     |        |
|              |                         |           | 5,000 |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Sauk River              | ^1^       |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Nookachamps River       | ^1^       |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Baker River             | NA        |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Stillaguamish River     | 487       | 7,000 | 23,400 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Canyon Creek (SR)       | NA        | 100   | 400    |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Deer Creek (SR)         | NA        | 700   | 2,300  |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Snohomish/Skykomish     | 690       | 6,100 | 20,600 |
|              | River                   |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Pilchuck River          | 638       | 2,500 | 8,200  |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Snoqualmie River        | 500       | 3,400 | 11,400 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Tolt River (SR)         | 40        | 300   | 1,200  |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | North Fork Skykomish    | NA        | 200   | 500    |
|              | River (SR)              |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
| Central and  | Cedar River             | NA        | 1,200 | 4,000  |
| South Sound  |                         |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | North Lake Washington   | NA        | 4,800 | 16,000 |
|              | Tributaries             |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Green River             | 1,282     | 5,600 | 18,700 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Puyallup/Carbon River   | 136       | 4,500 | 15,100 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | White River             | 130       | 3,600 | 12,000 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Nisqually River         | 1,368     | 6,100 | 20,500 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | East Kitsap Tributaries | NA        | 2,600 | 8,700  |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | South Sound Tributaries | NA        | 6,300 | 21,200 |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
| Strait of    | Elwha River             | 1,241     | 2,619 |        |
| Juan de      |                         |           |       |        |
| Fuca         |                         |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Dungeness River         | 408       | 1,200 | 4,100  |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Strait of Juan de Fuca  | 95        | 1,000 | 3,300  |
|              | Independent Tributaries |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Sequim an Discovery Bay | NA        | 500   | 1,700  |
|              | Tributaries             |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | Skokomish River         | 958       | 2,200 | 7,300  |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | West Hood Canal         | 150       | 2,500 | 8,400  |
|              | Tributaries             |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | East Hood Canal         | 93        | 1,800 | 6,200  |
|              | Tributaries             |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+
|              | South Hook Canal        | 91        | 2,100 | 7,100  |
|              | Tributaries             |           |       |        |
+--------------+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------+

: Table . Population scores for Oregon Coast coho salmon decision
support system criterion for assessments conducted in 2012 (using data
through 2009 return year), 2015 (data through 2014 return year), and
2020 (data through 2019 return year).  The criteria are:
PP-1---Population productivity (geometric mean of natural return ratio
in low years); PP-3---Critical abundance (mean spawner densities in low
years); PD-1---Spawner abundance (harmonic mean sufficient to avoid
genetic risks); PD-2---Artificial influence (% of hatchery fish on
spawning grounds); PD-3---Spawner distributions (\>4 fish per mile in
half of watersheds); PD-4---Juvenile distributions (pools with
[\>]{.underline} 1 fish).  See Wainwright et al. (2008, 2014) for
additional details.  Also included are the Populations Persistence (PP),
Population Sustainability (PS), and Stratum Sustainability (SS) scores,
and the \'minimum level of desired status\' of each population under the
Oregon Coast Coho Conservation Plan (P=Pass, F=Fail).

### Updated biological risk summary

Consideration of the above analyses indicates that the viability of the
Puget Sound Steelhead DPS has improved somewhat since the Puget Sound
Steelhead TRT concluded that the DPS was at very low viability, as were
all three of its constituent MPGs, and many of its 32 DIPs (Hard *et
al.* 2015).  Increases in spawner abundance were observed in a number of
populations over the last five years (Figure 95).  These improvements
were disproportionately found within the South and Central Puget Sound
and Strait of Juan de Fuca and Hood Canal MPGs, and primarily among
smaller populations. The apparent reversal of strongly negative trends
among winter run populations in the White, Nisqually, and Skokomish
rivers abated somewhat the demographic risks facing those populations. 
Certainly, improvement in the status of the Elwha River steelhead
(winter and summer run) following the removal of the Elwha dams reduced
the demographic and diversity risk for the DIP and MPG.  Improvements in
abundance were not as widely observed in the Northern Puget Sound MPG. 
Foremost among the declines were summer and winter run populations in
the Snohomish Basin.  These populations figure prominently as sources of
abundance for the MPG and DPS.  Additionally, the decline in the Tolt
River summer-run steelhead population was especially of concern given
that it is the only population for which we have abundance estimates.
The demographic and diversity risks to the Tolt River summer-run DIP are
very high.  In fact, all summer run steelhead populations in the North
Cascades MPG are likely at a very high demographic risk.  In spite of
improvements in some areas, most populations are still at relatively low
abundance levels, with about a third of the DIPs unmonitored and
presumably at very low levels.

Continued limits on harvest will facilitate population rebuilding during
"good" (high escapement) years and buffer against demographic risks
under "bad" (low escapement) years.  Artificial propagation programs
have undergone major changes in both the quantity and quality of
hatchery fish produced. The proposed termination of the non-native
Skamania Hatchery origin summer-run steelhead programs represents a
major effort to reduce introgression, although the genetic legacy of
past hatchery releases remains to be determined.  The release of the
domesticated Chambers Creek hatchery-origin winter steelhead continues
in a limited number of basins.  More importantly, integrated programs
with locally-sourced broodstocks have been established to assist in
recovery.  Risks to diversity from hatchery programs continue, but at a
reduced level.  Furthermore, self-sustaining natural populations of
winter-run steelhead persist throughout the Puget Sound DPS, albeit at
low abundances, and with a very limited risk of interaction with
hatchery-origin steelhead.  Overall, the status of summer-run steelhead
populations, or the summer-run component of summer/winter populations
remains somewhat precarious. For many populations information is absent,
and with possible exception of the Elwha River, the remaining
populations have critically low abundances and/or varying levels of
genetic introgression by out-of-DPS sources. There are a number of
planned, ongoing, and completed events that will likely benefit
steelhead populations in the future, but have not yet effected changes
in adult abundance.  Among these, the removal of the diversion dam on
the Middle Fork Nooksack River, passage improvements at Mud Mountain
Dam, the ongoing passage program in the North Fork Skokomish River, and
the planned passage program at Howard Hansen Dam.  Dam removal in the
Elwha River, and the resurgence of the endemic winter and summer-run
steelhead runs have underscored the benefits of restoring passage.  The
Elwha River scenario is perhaps somewhat unique in that upstream habitat
is in pristine condition and smolts emigrate into the Strait of Juan de
Fuca and not Puget Sound or Hood Canal.  Improvements in spatial
structure can only be effective if done in concert with necessary
improvements in habitat.  Habitat restoration efforts are ongoing, but
land development and habitat degradation concurrent with increasing
human population in the Puget Sound corridor may results in a continuing
net loss of habitat.  Recovery efforts in conjunction with improved
ocean and climatic conditions have resulted in improved viability status
for the majority of populations in this DPS; however, absolute
abundances are still low, especially summer-run populations, and the DPS
remains at high to moderate risk.

## Hood Canal summer-run chum salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU

The ESU includes all naturally spawning populations of summer-run chum
salmon in Hood Canal tributaries as well as populations in Olympic
Peninsula rivers between Hood Canal and Dungeness Bay, Washington, as
well as several artificial propagation programs (85 FR 81822, Figure
102).  The Puget Sound Technical Recovery Team identified two
independent populations for the Hood Canal summer chum, one which
includes the spawning aggregations from rivers and creeks draining into
the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and one which includes spawning aggregations
within Hood Canal proper (Sands *et al.* 2009).  

![](./media/media/image113.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure . Map of the Hood Canal summer-run chum salmon ESU's spawning and
rearing areas, illustrating populations and major population groups.  

### Summary of previous status conclusions

*2005*

At the time of the 2005 status review (Good *et al*. 2005), the Puget
Sound TRT had not yet finalized its population designations or viability
criteria for this ESU.  Most stocks were showing positive growth rates
and increased natural spawning abundance compared to the time of
listing.  These increases were likely a result of harvest reductions,
supplementation programs in some streams, habitat restoration projects
in freshwater and nearshore habitats, and possibly improvements in ocean
conditions.

*2010*

Ford *et al*. (2011) noted that the spawning abundance of this ESU had
clearly increased since the time of listing, although the abundance for
the 2010 review was down from the previous 5-years.  While spawning
abundances had remained relatively high compared to the low levels in
the early 1990's, productivity had decreased significantly, being lower
for brood years 2002-2006 than any previous 5-year average since 1971. 
Diversity had increased from the low values seen in the 1990s due both
to the reintroduction of spawning aggregates and the more uniform
relative abundance between populations; this was considered to be a good
sign for viability in terms of spatial structure and diversity. 
Spawning survey data showed that the spawning distribution within most
streams has been extended further upstream as abundance had increased. 
Overall, the new information considered in 2010, however, did not
indicate a change in the biological risk category since the time of the
last BRT status review in 2005.   

*2015*

NWFSC (2015) identified that natural-origin spawner abundance had
increased since ESA-listing and spawning abundance targets in both
populations were met in some years. Productivity rates had increased in
the prior five years, and had been greater than replacement rates in the
past two years for both populations.  However, productivity of
individual spawning aggregates showed that only two of eight aggregates
had viable performance.  Spatial structure and diversity viability
parameters for each population had increased and nearly met the
viability criteria.  Despite substantive gains towards meeting viability
criteria in the Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca summer chum salmon
populations, the ESU did not meet all of the recovery criteria for
population viability. 

### Description of new data available for this review

Escapement data, total run size, estimated natural-origin spawners (NOS)
and supplementation-origin spawners (SOS), age distribution of the
natural-origin escapement, and hatchery broodstock take are recorded per
spawning aggregation are available for each fishery management area from
1974 through 2019.  Catch data are available only through 2018. The
Point No Point Treaty Tribes (PNPTT) and Washington Department of Fish
and Wildlife (WDFW) completed a five-year review of the Summer Chum
Salmon Conservation Initiative for the period 2005 through 2013 (PNPTT &
WDFW 2014) and which details all data listed above, and also provides
some corrections to previous estimates. The co-managers are currently in
the process of completing a new five-year review for the period 2014
through 2019, but the results are not yet published. Adult return data
for 2019 was still preliminary. Their new review also includes an
updated viability analysis. Data presented here in this document include
exactly the same data (through 2019). Estimates of age composition for
each stream or natural spawning aggregation are also available for the
newer period 2015-2019.  A genetic stock identification and assessment
program was conducted through the 2005-2019 time period, and extensive
collection of data (DNA, scales, lengths, otoliths, sex, abundance) was
conducted.  During the years when mark recoveries of otoliths and
adipose fin clipped returning adults were conducted primarily on the
spawning grounds and allowed estimation of level of straying for the
supplementation-origin program fish to other drainages, and estimation
of total returns of both natural origin and supplementation origin
fish.  Supplementation programs were begun in 1992, prior to which all
summer chum adult returns to Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca were
natural-origin fish.  The first hatchery supplementation-origin adults
returned to spawn naturally in 1995, but 2001 was the first year in
which large returns of summer chum supplementation-origin fish
contributed to total adult returns.  Estimates of the proportions of
hatchery fish on the spawning grounds are available from 1974 through
2019 for the Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca populations (Scott
Bass (PNPTT) and Mark Downen (WDFW), pers. comm.).  Hatchery
contribution varies greatly among the spawning aggregations within each
population.  It is generally highest in the Strait of Juan de Fuca
population, ranging from 8.4 to 62.8% in the Strait of Juan de Fuca
population, and 5.8 to 40.2% in the Hood Canal population.  The hatchery
contribution also generally decreased as supplementation programs were
terminated as planned (PNPTT & WDFW 2014).  All were ended by 2011 in
the Strait of Juan de Fuca population, and by 2017 in the Hood Canal
population. To estimate run size, state and tribal co-managers apportion
catch data out to spawning aggregates based on the location of the fish
catch in relation to the spawning tributaries (PNPTT & WDFW 2014).  

### Abundance and productivity

Estimates of total (NOS + SOS) and natural (NOS) spawning abundances are
available from 1974 for both the Hood Canal population and the Strait of
Juan de Fuca population, and are shown from 1980 through 2019 in this
review (Figure 103).  Smoothed trends in estimated total and natural
population spawning abundances for both Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de
Fuca populations have generally increased over the 1980 to 2017 time
period. Shorter-term trends, specifically from 2002 to 2016 for the
Strait of Juan de Fuca population, and from 2003 to 2017 for the Hood
Canal population have coincided with the supplementation programs. 
Comanager's 2018 assessment (Lestelle *et al.* 2018) provides evidence
that increased abundances have been sustained at a level higher than
during the period of listing.  However, since 2016, abundances for both
populations have sharply decreased.  This began in 2017 for the Strait
of Juan de Fuca population and in 2018 for the Hood Canal population.
This newest information is important in considering summer chum salmon
abundance and productivity trends, and co-managers theorize to be
related to Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) effects on ocean conditions
(Lestelle *et al.* 2018; Lestelle 2020).

Average escapements (geometric means) for 5-year intervals beginning in
1990 show estimates of trends over the intervals for both natural-origin
spawners (NOS) and total (NOS + SOS) spawners (Table 57).  The Hood
Canal population has had a 46% increase in abundance of natural-origin
(40% increase in total) spawners in the most recent 5-year time period
(2015-2019) over the 2010-2014 time period.  The Strait of Juan de Fuca
has had a 29% decrease in abundance of natural-origin (43% decrease in
total) spawners in the most recent 5-year time period.  Spawner
abundances in both Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca populations
were lowest throughout the 1990's, but increased in the early 2000's and
had been sustained through 2016.

![](./media/media/image114.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="2.676388888888889in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population      1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \% Change
  --------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Strait of Juan  386 (386)   628 (822)   2195 (4178) 4023 (5353) 6417 (8231) 4580 (4684) -29 (-43)
  de Fuca SumR                                                                            

  Hood Canal SumR 979 (979)   5170 (7223) 13115       11284       16085       23533       46 (40)
                                          (18928)     (13605)     (17419)     (24314)     
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year geometric mean of raw natural origin spawner counts.
  This is the raw total spawner count times the fraction wild estimate,
  if available. In parentheses, 5-year geometric mean of raw total
  spawner counts is shown. A value only in parentheses means that a
  total spawner count was available but no or only one estimate of
  natural origin spawners available. The geometric mean was computed as
  the product of counts raised to the power 1 over the number of counts
  available (2 to 5). A minimum of 2 values were used to compute the
  geometric mean. Percent change between the most recent two 5-year
  periods is shown on the far right.

Fifteen-year trends in log natural-origin spawner abundance were
computed over two time periods (1990 -- 2005 and 2004 -- 2019) from a
linear regression model applied to the smoothed wild spawner log
abundance estimate over annual return years. Trends were strongly
positive in the two populations in the first time period, but abundance
trends for both populations have decreased to close to zero in the most
recent 15-year period (Table 57).  

Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of the smoothed
natural spawning abundance in year t minus the smoothed natural spawning
abundance in year (t-4), have decreased over the past three to four
years, but had been above replacement rates in five prior years.
Productivity rates have varied above and below replacement rates over
the entire time period (Figure 104).  This is the realized productivity
rate, and values below zero indicate that productivity in a given year
is estimated to be below replacement rates for returning natural-origin
spawners.  

![https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/zNAdpjXHzmOxPcZtZoTAamtAnX3AGwOEXyBuI_0ZV08oguh4bIY5XeL5VFh1Wi86YukhRNbWOLA9-SZ_gABk\--xUsBA9R5ZTY3yrANBpw1hQUWGojSWGNU9E-JrOBsd1ak8vwQ](./media/media/image115.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="2.40625in"}

Figure . Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of the
smoothed natural spawning abundance in year *t*  - smoothed natural
spawning abundance in year (*t* -- 4).

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population                      1990-2005           2004-2019
  ------------------------------- ------------------- --------------------
  Strait of Juan de Fuca SumR     0.17 (0.11, 0.23)   0 (-0.05, 0.05)

  Hood Canal SumR                 0.22 (0.17, 0.27)   0.02 (-0.03, 0.08)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 15-year trends in log wild spawner abundance computed from a
  linear regression applied to the smoothed wild spawner log abundance
  estimate. Only populations with at least 4 wild spawner estimates from
  1980 to 2019 are shown and with at least 2 data points in the first 5
  years and last 5 years of the 15-year period.

### Harvest

There are no directed fisheries on Hood Canal summer chum.  However,
they are taken incidentally in fisheries directed at other species in
the Strait of Juan de Fuca, in Hood Canal, and in Canada.  Because the
populations from the Eastern Strait of Juan de Fuca (Dungeness River
through Port Townsend Bay) are not subject to fisheries in Hood Canal
directed at Chinook and coho salmon, they experience lower overall
harvest rates in general.  Historically, the Eastern Strait of Juan de
Fuca population experienced harvest rates on the order of 10-30% with
rates as high as 50% in individual years.  The Hood Canal population was
subject to harvest rates that were typically on the order of 50% to 70%
with rates in individual years approaching 90% (PNPTT and WDFW 2014).

In response to severely depressed runs of summer-run chum salmon, in the
early 1990s, the State of Washington and the Western Washington Treaty
Tribes took measures to curb the incidental harvest of summer chum and
harvest rates fell dramatically (Figure 105).  The co-managers
implemented a Base Conservation Regime (BCR) and continued to constrain
harvest impacts as runs have approached or returned to historic levels,
leading to escapements that have exceed historic levels.  Under the BCR,
harvest rates have declined to about 3% to 15% for Hood Canal summer
chum and to less than 2% for the Strait of Juan de Fuca summer chum
(Lestelle *et al.* 2018).  Harvest rates have been below the BCR harvest
rate limits for all years in the Strait of Juan de Fuca fisheries and
for all years except 2004 and 2007-2009 in Hood Canal fisheries.  From
2000 through 2018, the harvest rate for the ESU has averaged about 7%
(data from Scott Bass, PNPTT, Pers. Comm.).

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/p0WYgS1zt0PA_4BUfz5E_GpGrXbbEygA8fnH1Wo5bcXbnr86mAAfm3vm0P6_fI5_vyvZjc-vPG_XllmyezRahcWbOZJZWmrLusA11x2X5q_E9QMLr0okh_2ITuWSOWpbxj73gw](./media/media/image116.png){width="6.03125in"
height="3.1875in"}

Figure .  Total exploitation rate on the combined Hood Canal/Strait of
Juan de Fuca summer chum salmon ESU.  Data from comanager run
reconstruction (1974-2018, data from comanagers, Scott Bass, PNPTT,
pers. comm., Dec. 2019; Figure from PNPTT and WDFW 2014, with updated
data). 

### Spatial structure and diversity

Spatial structure and diversity measures for the Hood Canal summer chum
recovery program include the reintroduction and sustaining of
natural-origin spawning in multiple small streams where summer chum
spawning aggregates had been extirpated.  A supplementation program was
initiated in 1992 to meet this objective, and supportive habitat
protection and restoration projects have been conducted in many of the
streams as well.  The first supplementation-origin spawners (SOS) began
to return in 1995, however, it wasn't until 2001 that large numbers of
SOS program fish were widely distributed in each population (PNPTT and
WDFW 2014). Previously extirpated spawning subpopulations have been
reintroduced and now rebounded in Chimacum Creek in the Strait of Juan
de Fuca population. Reintroductions in Big Beef Creek and Tahuya River
in the Hood Canal population have not been quite as successful and the
rebounding natural-origin production does not appear it will be
sustained (Lestelle et al. 2018). Two other streams, Dewatto and
Skokomish rivers, which had been deemed extirpated by the PS TRT at the
time of their analysis, and which have not had reintroduction efforts,
have seen subpopulations rebound substantially in recent years.  This
follows completion of habitat restoration projects in the lower portion
of the Skokomish River and estuary. Habitat on the Dewatto River remains
largly intact (Lestelle et al. 2018)

One measure of spatial structure and diversity parameters is related to
the proportion of natural-origin spawners (NOS) vs.
supplementation-origin (SOS) spawners on the spawning grounds.  All
returning summer chum spawners were wild in both populations until fish
from the supplementation program began to return to spawn in 1995
(Figure 106).  Supplementation programs were intended to run for a
maximum duration of three generations, or 12 years.  Programs in the
Strait of Juan de Fuca population (Salmon, Jimmycomelately, and Chimacum
creeks), and in the Hood Canal population (Big Quilcene, Hamma Hamma,
Lilliwaup, Union, Tahuya and Big Beef) were phased in between 1992 and
2003.  As program goals were met all programs have now been terminated. 
Lilliwaup Creek did not meet the production targets (e.g., broodstock
collections and release numbers) in some earlier years and also had a
lack of focused habitat protection/restoration efforts so
supplementation was continued in Lilliwaup Creek through brood year 2017
(Lestelle et al. 2018).  As SOS fish returns have phased out, there has
been a gradual return to predominantly natural-origin spawners for both
Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca summer chum populations (Figure
106, Table 59).  For the Hood Canal population, SOS fish returned to the
Dewatto and Tahuya Rivers and to Lilliwaup Creek through 2018.  The
Strait of Juan de Fuca population shows estimates of  nearly 100%
natural-origin spawners (NOS) since 2015 (Figure 106).  

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/dn4OKVwIxfdBAyeCXbLcAHgVfM8MAq6R8LVqOF77TKwlWRN-c0O1V9Z4QW6jj7Th3L5xXqaJ76spy_5n2hTOzfsQ9_fZLzbYgE9FFZtaQn-lou8q4dRsXh-UdhEz6INdoejypQ](./media/media/image117.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="2.40625in"}

Figure . Proportion of each summer chum population comprised of
natural-origin spawners.  Line shows a smoothed trend and points show
the annual estimates.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population             1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ---------------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Strait of Juan de Fuca 0.85        0.54        0.76        0.79        0.98
  SumR                                                                   

  Hood Canal SumR        0.72        0.70        0.83        0.92        0.97
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table . 5-year mean of fraction wild (sum of all estimates divided
  by the number of estimates). Blanks mean no estimate available in that
  5-year range.

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

The PS TRT defined the abundance and productivity viability criteria for
the Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca summer chum salmon populations
using two different population viability analyses (PVAs).  One PVA
method assumed density independence at low population sizes and
replacement growth factor of 1:1.  The other method (Viability and Risk
Assessment Procedure, or VRAP) assumed density dependence between
recruits and spawners and generated a series of spawner-recruit curves
based on variable productivities and capacities, and fixed exploitation
rates (NMFS 2007; Sands *et al.* 2009).  We have not conducted a
detailed VRAP assessment for this review, but the state and tribal
co-managers have done so several times in recent years.  Co-managers
conducted a new viability analysis using VRAP in 2017, and again in 2020
with data through return year 2019 (as described above) (Lestelle *et
al.* 2014; Lestelle *et al.* 2018; Lestelle 2020).  These update the
analysis conducted by the PS TRT and presented in Sands et al (2009). 
The potential impacts of shifts in decadal-scale ocean (i.e., the
Pacific Decadal Oscillation) and climate regimes on summer chum
performance and potential limits to recovery were also considered in
this the 2017 analysis and the most recent years (2017-2019) of reduced
abundances and productivities during a warm PDO ocean cycle which
started in 2014 provide more proof for this theory (Lestelle *et al.*
2014; Lestelle *et al.* 2018; Lestelle 2020). Observations of spawner
abundances and productivities over the next few years will be necessary
to adequately evaluate what the effects of a warm phase of the PDO will
require for summer chum management and recovery goals. 

The PS TRT VRAP analysis concluded minimum viability levels assuming
density independence were 12,500 for the Strait of Juan de Fuca
population and 24,700 for the Hood Canal population.  Abundance of
natural-origin spawners has clearly increased since listing in 1999 and
these targets were attained in the Strait of Juan de Fuca population in
2013 and 2015, and in the Hood Canal population in five years since
recovery implementation efforts began (2012, 2014-2017)(NOAA A&P
tables).   Productivity for the Strait of Juan de Fuca population was
greater than 1:1 during brood years 2007-2012, and for the Hood Canal
population during brood years 2009 through 2013, though productivity has
varied for both populations over the entire time period (Figure 104).  

The PS TRT used VRAP to model viability (defined as [\<]{.underline}5%
risk of extinction over 100 years) given specific intrinsic
productivity, capacity, and exploitation rates.  The resulting minimum
spawner escapement numbers for the Strait of Juan de Fuca was 4,500
adults given intrinsic productivity of 5 and capacity of 3,300.  For the
Hood Canal population, a resulting minimum escapement of 18,300, given
intrinsic productivity of 5 and capacity of 13,500.  Results of the
co-managers updated VRAP analysis in 2017 (through brood year 2013)
showed that the minimum abundance viability threshold with zero harvest
for Strait of Juan de Fuca population had again increased over prior
analyses (2009 and 2014) to 6,300, for an intrinsic productivity of 6
and capacity of 4,600. For the Hood Canal population, the minimum
abundance viability threshold in the 2017 analysis had decreased to
4,800 over the prior analyses, with an intrinsic productivity of 8 and
capacity of 3,600, with zero exploitation rate. The changes in the
viability thresholds were considered to be due to the longer data sets
which produced more precise estimates of coefficient of variation (CV),
particularly for the Hood Canal population which had one outlier data
point, i.e. a very high return from the 2000 brood year (3.5 times as
high as the next highest return) that was never repeated. The CV for the
Hood Canal population was considerably lower in the more recent analysis
also because there are 10 spawning aggregations, as opposed to only 3
spawning aggregations in the Strait of Juan de Fuca population (Lestelle
et al. 2018). Results of 2017 VRAP analyses also suggested the Hood
Canal population would be considered to be at negligible risk of
extinction considering current biological performance, provided that the
exploitation rate remains very low. The Strait of Juan de Fuca
population had a much higher risk of extinction, even with a zero
exploitation rate (Lestelle et al. 2018). As noted above, since 2017,
both populations have experienced much lower returns, and a 2020 update
of the VRAP analysis resulted in considerably reduced population
performance under a changing ocean climate. The analysis, with the
addition of the 2017-2019 return data and put in the context of warm
(brood years 1979-1998 and 2014-2016) and cool (BY 1999-2013) Pacific
Decadal Oscillation (PDO) ocean climate cycles, indicates that the Hood
canal population does still exceed the 5% threshold risk curve during
both warm and cool PDO regimes with a 0% exploitation rate. At the 30%
exploitation rate and during the years of the cool PDO regime, the Hood
Canal population greatly exceeded the 5% threshold. The SJDF population
did exceed the 5% extinction risk threshold with a 0% exploitation rate
during the cool ocean regime, but has a very high risk of extinction in
the warm PDO time periods even with a 0% exploitation rate (Lestelle
2020). 

In addition, analyses of individual spawning aggregations indicate that
four of six extant spawning aggregations in the Hood Canal population
are at relatively high risk of extinction (see Figure 13 in Lestelle
2020). The Quilcene spawning aggregation has much higher performance
than any of the others, which holds under both warm and cool PDO
regimes.  Union, Dosewallips, Duckabush and Hamma Hamma performances are
still viable at the five percent risk threshold under the cool PDO ocean
regime, even with 30% exploitation rates, but none of these spawning
aggregates are viable under the warm PDO regime with zero exploitation
rates. These results indicate the importance of the Quilcene spawning
aggregation to the total population viability, and the necessity of
continuing to evaluate the individual spawning aggregations (including
their spatial distribution and diversity) to determine population
viability. In the SJDF population, both Salmon/Snow Creek and
Jimmy-Come-Lately spawning aggregations are viable with a 30%
exploitation rate under the cool PDO regime, but neither are viable
under the warm PDO regime (Lestelle 2020).

The TRT defined viability for spatial structure as the need to maintain
spawning aggregations that are well-distributed across the historical
range of the populations (Sands *et al.* 2009).  Most spawning
aggregations need to be within 20 km of adjacent aggregations, and the
major spawning aggregations need to be \<40 km apart to meet the spatial
structure viability parameter.  Seven Ecological Diversity Groups were
identified in the ESU, and three criteria were used by the TRT in
defining recovery for the diversity viability parameter (Table 60).
Diversity viability criteria specified that one or more spawning
aggregations must be persistent within each of the two to four major
ecological diversity groups historically present within the two
populations (Sands *et al*. 2009, NMFS 2007). 

+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+
| Geographic        | Proposed Ecological  | Spawning aggregations:    |
| R                 | Diversity Groups     | Extant\* and extinct\*\*  |
| egion(population) |                      |                           |
+===================+======================+===========================+
| Eastern Strait of | Dungeness            | Dungeness R (unknown      |
| Juan de Fuca      |                      | status)                   |
+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+
|                   | Sequim-Admiralty     | Jimmycomelately Cr\*      |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Salmon Cr\*               |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Snow Cr\*                 |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Chimacum Cr\*\*           |
+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+
|                   |                      |                           |
+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+
| Hood Canal        | Toandos              | Unknown                   |
+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+
|                   | Quilcene             | Big Quilcene R\*          |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Little Quilcene R\*       |
+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+
|                   | Mid West Hood Canal  | Dosewallips R\*           |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Duckabush R\*             |
+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+
|                   | West Kitsap          | Big Beef Cr\*\*           |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Seabeck Cr\*\*            |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Stavis Cr\*\*             |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Anderson Cr\*\*           |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Dewatto R\*\*             |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Tahuya R\*\*              |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Mission Cr\*\*            |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Union R\*                 |
+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+
|                   | Lower West Hood      | Hamma Hamma R\*           |
|                   | Canal                |                           |
|                   |                      | Lilliwaup Cr\*            |
|                   |                      |                           |
|                   |                      | Skokomish R\*             |
+-------------------+----------------------+---------------------------+

Co-managers revisited these criteria and provided guidance in Lestelle
et al. (2018).  Some new genetics data have prompted these suggestions,
with a primary focus including evidence that straying appears to occur
along shorelines and into adjacent/neighboring streams, but does not
appear to occur across Hood Canal. Hence they suggest modification of
the above West Kitsap geographic unit be split into two units, east Hood
Canal and south Hood Canal. One 'robust' spawning aggregate would be
required in each geographic unit.  They define the term 'robust' and
suggest that the most likely spawning aggregates to meet these needs
given geographic location, current available habitat, and spawner
abundances would be Big Beef Creek and Dewatto River in East and South
Hood Canal units, respectively (Lestelle et al. 2018). These spawning
aggregates would likely need to have re-introduction efforts in order to
succeed.  It's important to note that this definition of spatial
structure and diversity is considered more in terms of habitat capacity
and quality than our measure above of genetic diversity or natural- and
supplementation-origin abundance. Also relevant in this distinction is
that the concept of maintaining high quality habitat (i.e., promoting
protection and completing restoration actions) in these streams is
considered to have substantial importance to build resilience of the
individual spawning aggregates of the two Summer Chum populations
through time periods of poor ocean productivity. See Lestelle et al.
2018 for a complete discussion of these concepts and analyses. A second
spatial structure/diversity suggestion, for the Strait of Juan de Fuca
population, was that this population would have less risk of extinction
if there were a robust spawning aggregate in the Dungeness River.
Regardless of lack of documented historic abundances, they believe this
could be achieved with reintroduction and habitat restoration techniques
employed in other streams in the ESU.  They present data and link
observations of re-established spawning, particularly in the Skokomish
River, and suggest that large scale estuarine habitat restoration
efforts have contributed to the increases in spawner abundance (Lestelle
et al. 2018). 

Criteria for spatial structure/diversity were nearly met for Strait of
Juan de Fuca and Hood Canal summer chum populations until the recent
spawner abundance downturns in returns that started in 2017.  As of
2018, the Quilcene, Dosewallips, Duckabush, Hamma Hamma, and Union
subpopulations met the TRT criteria (and also the definition of 'robust'
by the co-managers criteria) for viability.  That is, spawning
aggregates were present and persistent within five of the six major
ecological diversity groups identified by the PS TRT (Table 60). Two
previously considered extirpated subpopulations, in the Skokomish and
Dewatto rivers, also rebounded with spawning aggregations despite not
having re-introduction projects. An exception to the TRT criteria,
regarding distance between spawning aggregations is in east Hood Canal
(West Kitsap). Spawning abundance in Big Beef Creek has remained
consistently low (zero or near zero for the last three years) and the
Tahuya River spawning aggregate has not sustained adequate natural
production after supplementation efforts ended.  These two streams are
about 60 km apart, thus an additional spawning aggregation is needed,
and is most likely achievable in the Dewatto River with additional
reintroduction and habitat actions (Lestelle et al. 2018).  Habitat
restoration has been completed in both Big Beef Creek and Tahuya River
as well, and reintroductions of supplementation-origin stock from the
Union River are proposed by co-managers (Lestelle et al. 2018). The
Lilliwaup spawning aggregate was supplemented through 2017 and
supplementation-origin fish were still returning in 2019. There is still
considerable uncertainty regarding the historical or current presence of
a spawning aggregation in the Dungeness River (PNPTT and WDFW 2014),
however, as mentioned above, the co-managers believe that establishing
an additional spawning aggregate in the Dungeness would substantially
improve the risk of extinction for the Strait of Juan de Fuca population
(Lestelle et al. 2018). 

The co-managers assessment using VRAP was also used for each of the 8
extant spawning aggregations in Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca in
order to estimate habitat goals for each spawning aggregation.  Results
led to the recommendation that habitat restoration and protection
actions can then be done strategically to reduce the performance gaps
for spawning aggregations projected to be below viability while also
balancing the importance of biological diversity, spatial structure, and
population abundance and productivity to long-term viability (Lestelle
et al. 2014).  The co-managers propose using the results of these
analyses to develop new criteria and harvest provisions for a
"Recovering" regime that would replace the Base Conservation Regime
(PNPTT & WDFW 2014).  An in depth discussion of the rationale is
presented in both the co-manager status review (PNPTT & WDFW 2014) and
in the guidance document (Lestelle *et al*. 2018).  

The Hood Canal Coordinating Council (HCCC) prepared the recovery plan
for Hood Canal and Eastern Strait of Juan de Fuca Summer Chum salmon in
cooperation with local counties of the ESU and the co-managers (HCCC
2005). This plan currently guides habitat protection and restoration
activities for summer chum recovery. Despite gains in habitat protection
and restoration, the co-managers remain concerned that given the
pressures of population growth, existing land use management measures
through local governments (i.e., shoreline management plans, critical
area ordinances, and comprehensive plans) may be compromised or not
enforced. The Hood Canal Coordinating Council and co-managers advocate
for the development of a strong habitat monitoring and adaptive
management program as part of the recovery plan and recommend it be
integrated to complement the existing stock assessment, harvest and
hatchery management programs.  The HCCC and co-managers propose there
are sufficient new data and assessments which warrant revision of the
current recovery plan, including updating recovery goals, prioritizing
future habitat protection and restoration actions, addressing harvest
goals, continuing reintroduction efforts, and continuing monitoring and
evaluation for the Hood Canal Summer Chum ESU. They are currently
working with NOAA on this revision.  

### Updated biological risk summary

Natural-origin spawner abundance has increased since ESA-listing and
spawning abundance targets in both populations have been met in some
years. Productivity had increased at the time of the last review (NWFSC
2015) but has been down for the last 3 years for the Hood Canal
population, and for the last four years for the Strait of Juan de Fuca
population.  Productivity of individual spawning aggregates shows only
two of eight aggregates have viable performance.  Spatial structure and
diversity viability parameters, as originally determined by the TRT have
increased and nearly meet the viability criteria for both populations. 
Despite substantive gains towards meeting viability criteria in the Hood
Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca summer chum salmon populations, the ESU
still does not meet all of the recovery criteria for population
viability at this time.    

## Lake Ozette sockeye salmon ESU

### BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF ESU

The ESU includes all naturally spawned aggregations of sockeye salmon in
Lake Ozette and streams and tributaries flowing into Lake Ozette,
Washington (85 FR 81822, ). The ESU also includes fish originating from
one artificial propagation programs: the Umbrella Creek/Big River
sockeye hatchery program. The Puget Sound Technical Recovery Team (TRT)
considers the Lake Ozette sockeye salmon ESU to be composed of one
historical population (Currens *et al.* 2009), with substantial
sub-structuring of individuals into multiple spawning aggregations. The
primary existing spawning aggregations occur in two beach locations---
Allen's and Olsen's beaches, and in two tributaries, Umbrella Creek and
Big River.

![](./media/media/image118.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="5.024305555555555in"}

Figure \-- Map of the Lake Ozette sockeye salmon ESU's spawning and
rearing areas

### SUMMARY OF PREVIOUS STATUS CONCLUSIONS

Good et al. (2005) found little evidence of an increasing trend in
population abundance since the listing in 1999 and emphasized that the
available data was very uncertain which hampered efforts to assess tends
and status in the VSP criteria: abundance, spatial structure and
diversity. They recommended that the threatened status remain unchanged.

Ford et al. (2011) concluded that estimates of population abundance for
Lake Ozette sockeye remained highly variable and uncertain, making it
impossible to detect changes in abundance trends or in productivity. It
was clear, though, that population levels remained very low compared to
historical levels when harvest on these stocks was plentiful. The review
noted that assessment methods must improve in order to evaluate the
status of this population/ESU and its responses to recovery actions.
Overall, the new information considered in 2010 did not indicate a
change in the biological risk category since the time of the last BRT
status review in 2005.

In the 2015 status review update, NWFSC (2015) found that little had
changed since the previous update. Abundance estimates were still very
low relative to the abundance recovery goal and insufficient information
was available to effectively assess the status of the beach spawning
component of the population.

### DESCRIPTION OF NEW DATA AVAILABLE FOR THIS REVIEW

Run size estimates based on expanded weir counts have been extended from
2013 to 2019 (M.J. Haggerty personal communication Oct 2020). In
addition, some of the previous data was updated to improve consistency
across the data series. In 2012, no estimate was generated due to a hard
drive failure. For 2013 through 2016 estimates were based on a river
spanning weir with a video chamber (Haggerty 2014), while estimates for
2017 through 2019 were based on an ARIS imaging sonar operated in
conjunction with a partial weir ((Denton 2018; Makah Fisheries
Management (MFM) 2020); M.J. Haggerty personal communication Oct. 20
2020). For both methods, portions of the run were not enumerated due to
in river conditions and technical problems. Estimates were expanded to
account for these missing days using estimated average run timing from
years with more complete data (Haggerty 2014). In addition, a detection
rate estimate was applied to account for fish missed during review of
the imagery. Data from the Umbrella Creek hatchery program was also
updated to 2019 (Hinton & Cooke 2019; Makah Fisheries Management (MFM)
2020). This included estimates of total returns, hatchery fraction, age
composition and the brood stock take. Beach spawner survey data
including live and dead counts, survey date ranges and the number of
surveys was also updated (Hinton & Cooke 2019; Makah Fisheries
Management (MFM) 2020).

A spawning abundance series from 1977 to 2019 was constructed from a
number of different sources (, ). As a whole the source data was very
uncertain with modest improvements in the last decade. From 1977 to 1995
the median expansion estimate from appendix B of the Lake Ozette Sockeye
Limiting Factors Analysis (Haggerty *et al.* 2009) was used. Missing
years during this period were filled with estimates based on the
regression between these values and estimates from the Lake Ozette
sockeye hatchery and genetic management plan (MFM 2000) when available.
In 1988 counting was conducted for only 3 days resulting in a total of
218 fish. We therefore discounted the high appendix B value (9,770),
instead defaulting to the regression method. From 1996 to 2003 values
from table 3.6 of the Lake Ozette Sockeye Limiting Factors Analysis
(Haggerty et al. 2009) were used. From 2004 to 2011, estimates were
available from Haggerty (2014). Finally, from 2013 through 2019, data
were provided by Mike Haggerty (M.J. Haggerty personal communication Oct
2020). In 2004, the run size estimate was roughly half of the estimated
return to Umbrella Creek. In addition it was noted that technical issues
with the video weir likely led to an under estimate. We therefore,
treated the estimate as missing, along with 2012. Both years, were then
filled in using a regression between the Umbrella Creek and Lake Ozette
run sizes, where both were available. Because % natural origin fish
could not be reliably estimated from 1987 to 1999 we used natural
spawning fish to describe abundance except where noted.

![Figure 1. The different sources of data used to construct the natural
spawners estimate for Lake Ozette. The thick light gray line represents
the final composite estimate. LFA refers to the limiting factors
analysis (Haggerty et al. 2009), HGMPextensionAppendix refers to Lake
Ozette Sockeye Hatchery Genetics Management Plan Extension Request
Appendix 2015, Haggerty2014 refers to Haggerty (2014), and Haggerty2020
refers to data provided by Mike Haggerty on October 30th
2020.](./media/media/image119.png){width="6.0in"
height="4.285714129483814in"}

Figure - The different sources of data used to construct the natural
spawners estimate for Lake Ozette. The thick light gray line represents
the final composite estimate. LFA refers to the limiting factors
analysis (Haggerty et al. 2009), HGMPextensionAppendix refers to Lake
Ozette Sockeye Hatchery Genetics Management Plan Extension Request
Appendix 2015, Haggerty2014 refers to Haggerty (2014), and Haggerty 2020
refers to data provided by Mike Haggerty on October 30th 2020.

+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > Year  | >        | >      | >       | > F     | > U     | > U     |
|         | Spawners |  Brood | Natural | raction | mbrella | mbrella |
|         |          | >      | > s     | > Wild  | > S     | > H     |
|         |          |  Stock | pawners |         | pawners | atchery |
|         |          |        |         |         |         | >       |
|         |          |        |         |         |         |  origin |
+=========+==========+========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
| > 1977  | > 2,752  | > 0    | > 2,752 | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1978  | > 2,398  | > 0    | > 2,398 | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1979  | > 1,335  | > 0    | > 1,335 | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1980  | > 1,054  | > 0    | > 1,054 | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1981  | > 858    | > 0    | > 858   | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1982  | > 4,131  | > 0    | > 4,131 | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1983  | > 617    | > 14   | > 603   | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1984  | > 2,474  | > 27   | > 2,447 | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1985  |          | > 40   |         | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1986  | > 1,217  | > 43   | > 1,174 | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1987  |          | > 123  |         | > 1.000 |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1988  | > 6,341  | > 193  | > 6,148 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1989  | > 1,677  | > 6    | > 1,671 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1990  | > 732    | > 33   | > 699   |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1991  | > 1,955  | > 175  | > 1,780 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1992  | > 4,167  | > 109  | > 4,058 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1993  | > 470    | > 32   | > 438   |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1994  | > 1,018  | > 54   | > 964   |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1995  | > 553    | > 94   | > 459   |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1996  | > 4,131  | > 200  | > 3,931 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1997  | > 1,609  | > 263  | > 1,346 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1998  | > 1,970  | > 88   | > 1,882 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 1999  | > 2,649  | > 29   | > 2,620 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2000  | > 5,064  | > 213  | > 4,851 | > 0.676 | > 4,842 | > 1,640 |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2001  | > 4,315  | > 238  | > 4,077 | > 0.971 | > 3,458 | > 124   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2002  | > 3,990  | > 170  | > 3,820 | > 0.934 | > 1,718 | > 262   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2003  | > 5,075  | > 199  | > 4,876 | > 0.970 | > 1,256 | > 153   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2004  | > 6,298  | > 218  | > 6,080 | > 0.938 | > 3,875 | > 389   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2005  | > 1,908  | > 187  | > 1,721 | > 0.900 | > 1,321 | > 190   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2006  | > 2,135  | > 60   | > 2,075 | > 0.935 | > 686   | > 140   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2007  | > 793    | > 45   | > 748   | > 0.991 | > 49    | > 7     |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2008  | > 2,389  | > 238  | > 2,151 | > 0.906 | > 1,664 | > 225   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2009  | > 4,988  | > 219  | > 4,769 | > 0.885 | > 3,611 | > 574   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2010  | > 3,220  | > 234  | > 2,986 | > 0.916 | > 3,327 | > 270   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2011  | > 2,625  | > 168  | > 2,457 | > 0.910 | > 740   | > 237   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2012  | > 8,373  | > 167  | > 8,206 | > 0.678 | > 5,152 | > 2,698 |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2013  | > 2,859  | > 209  | > 2,650 | > 0.803 | > 4,550 | > 564   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2014  | > 5,282  | > 185  | > 5,097 | > 0.987 | > 2,478 | > 67    |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2015  | > 6,846  | > 208  | > 6,638 | > 0.947 | > 3,053 | > 362   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2016  | > 13,073 | > 244  | >       | > 0.994 | > 2,208 | > 82    |
|         |          |        |  12,829 |         |         |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2017  | > 5,427  | > 162  | > 5,265 | > 0.978 | > 2,537 | > 118   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2018  | > 3,375  | > 111  | > 3,264 | > 0.883 | > 688   | > 396   |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| > 2019  | > 2,922  | > 28   | > 2,894 |         | > 304   |         |
+---------+----------+--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

Natural spawners were calculated by subtracting the effective catch from
the total run size (). The effective catch is the number of fish that
were removed from the natural spawning population due to harvest
(1977-1982) or brood stock take (1983-present). Until 2000 all brood
stock was taken from beaches (appendix C Haggerty et al. 2009). From
2000 on, the brood stock was taken from Umbrella Creek (MFM 2015; Hinton
& Cooke 2016; Hinton & Cooke 2019; Makah Fisheries Management (MFM)
2020).

The percentage of natural spawners that were of natural
origin,$p_{NOS}$, was 100% until 1987 since the first hatchery release
was in 1983. Between 1988 and 1999 there was no reliable data on percent
hatchery origin (Haggerty et al. 2009, section 3.53). Percent natural
origin for this period was therefore designated as unknown. For 2000 to
2019 data was available in the HGMP extension letter appendix (MFM 2015)
and the Lake Ozette Sockeye Resource Management Plans (Hinton and Cooke
2016; Hinton and Cooke 2019; MFM 2020). We calculate percent natural
origin as 1 -- Umbrella run size ($N_{Umb,y}$) times the Umbrella
hatchery fraction ($pHOS_{Umb,y}$) divided by total run size entering
the lake ($N_{tot}$).

$$pNOS_{tot,y} = 1 - \frac{N_{Umb,y} \times pHOS_{Umb,y}}{N_{tot,y}}$$

There are a number of issues with this approach: a) we know that that
there are additional hatchery fish in other tributaries, b) mortality
between entry to the lake and entry to Umbrella Creek is not accounted
for, and c) for many years, estimates are very uncertain for the
Umbrella Creek and Fish entering the lake. Both a) and b) will tend to
produce estimates that are biased high.

![Figure 3 - Panel 1: effective catch over time. Panel 2: Fraction of
natural spawners that are wild origin. Panel 3: Black line = natural
spawners, blue line = natural origin natural
spawners.](./media/media/image120.png){width="6.0in"
height="7.714284776902887in"}

Figure \-- Panel 1: effective catch over time. Panel 2: Fraction of
natural spawners that are wild origin. Panel 3: Black line = natural
spawners, blue line = natural origin natural spawners.

### ABUNDANCE AND PRODUCTIVITY

For the period from 1977 to 2019 the estimated natural spawners ranged
from 438 to 12,829, well below the 31,250 -- 121,000 viable population
range set in the Lake Ozette sockeye recovery plan (NMFS 2009) (). There
remains little evidence of a strong trend in the raw () or smoothed ()
abundance series over the full range of years or more recently since the
last status review (NWFSC 2015). However, the geometric mean of
abundance from 2015 to 2019 was higher than the previous 5 year
geometric mean and the trend over the last 15 years was positive . There
is some evidence of the dominant 4 year age of return in the abundance
series (), with the 1980 brood cycle line surpassing the other lines in
late 80's and maintaining this higher level for most 4 year cycles
since. Estimated productivity, calculated as the abundance in year t
divided by the abundance in year t-4, has shifted between negative and
positive values with a suggestive 10 to 20 year cycle in both the raw ()
and smoothed () data. While estimated productivity has recently been
positive, we may be entering a negative phase (). Given the degree of
uncertainty in the abundance estimates, any interpretation of trends of
small magnitude or over short time periods is speculative. Apparent
patterns may be artifacts of substantial changes to the estimation
method over time and/or changes in quantities on which the assumptions
are based (e.g. run timing) (Haggerty 2014).

While hatchery origin fish were known to contribute to the population
after the initiation of the Umbrella Creek Hatchery program in the mid
1980s, the % hatchery origin was not estimated until 2000. From 2000 to
2018 the estimated % hatchery origin ranged from 3% to 58% with a mean
of 18%. To date correcting for % hatchery origin has not qualitatively
changed the trends in abundance (). However, because the Umbrella creek
population is a large component of the total population (averaging 54%
over the last decade), large hatchery origin returns to Umbrella Creek
can translate to large hatchery fractions over all. For example, in 2012
over 50% of fish returning to Umbrella Creek were hatchery origin ().
Therefore, precise estimates of natural origin spawners depend on good
estimates % hatchery origin fish.

Ocean fisheries do not significantly impact Lake Ozette sockeye salmon.
Both Lake Ozette and the Ozette River, connecting the lake with the
ocean, are closed to salmon fishing with the exception of a winter
steelhead fishery in the Ozette River. The steelhead fishery ends in
February and Sockeye do not begin entering the lake until April.

![](./media/media/image121.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="2.676388888888889in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

![Figure 5 -- Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of
the smoothed natural spawning abundance in year t minus the smoothed
natural spawning abundance in year
(t-4).](./media/media/image122.png){width="6.0in"
height="2.4705872703412073in"}

Figure - Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of the
smoothed natural spawning abundance in year t minus the smoothed natural
spawning abundance in year (t-4).

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population   MPG      1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004      2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                   Change
  ------------ -------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Ozette Lake  Ozette   \(1163\)    \(1643\)    4162 (4678)    1789 (1939) 3253 (3820) 5873 (6185) 81 (62)
               Lake                                                                                

                                                                                                   
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population      MPG             1990-2005            2004-2019
  --------------- --------------- -------------------- --------------------
  Ozette Lake     Ozette Lake     0.09 (0.05, 0.12)    0.08 (0.04, 0.11)

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

![Figure 6 - Upper panel: Natural spawners vs year with lines connecting
4 year brood cycle lines. So, for example the 1977 brood cycle line
includes the years 1977, 1981, 1985, etc... Lower panel: Productivity vs
year where productivity is calculated as natural spawners in year t
divided by the natural spawners in year t-4. Notice the y-axis is on the
log scale in the lower panel.](./media/media/image123.png){width="6.0in"
height="6.0in"}

Figure - Upper panel: Natural spawners vs year with lines connecting 4
year brood cycle lines. So, for example the 1977 brood cycle line
includes the years 1977, 1981, 1985, etc... Lower panel: Productivity vs
year where productivity is calculated as natural spawners in year t
divided by the natural spawners in year t-4. Notice the y-axis is on the
log scale in the lower panel.

### SPATIAL STRUCTURE AND DIVERSITY

The historical geographic extent of beach spawning is not well
documented. It is certain, however, that it was more spatially extensive
than the current distribution. For example, Kemmerich (1939) noted that
from 1923-1926, "...most of the spawning seemed to be along the lake
shore in suitable places and especially at the mouths of the several
creeks." Beach spawning at stream mouths was last observed on Umbrella
beach in brood year 1978 (Dlugokenski *et al.* 1981). Contemporary beach
surveys are concentrated primarily on Allen's and Olsen's beaches but
less frequent more extensive surveys have not observed beach spawning
elsewhere for over a decade. Spawning on the upper beach (in shallower
water) has also declined, likely resulting from increased shoreline
vegetation. Ritchie and Bourgeois (2009) used aerial photography to
determine that more than half of the open beach area in 1953 was
vegetated by 2003. In the two remaining areas where beach spawning is
currently observed, Olsen's and Allen's beaches, over two thirds of the
open beach was covered with vegetation during the same period. They
hypothesize that the new vegetation is caused by increased fine sediment
deposition resulting from forest harvest in the tributary watersheds,
and changes in "...the timing of water-level fluctuations."

Estimates of total beach spawner abundance are not available. However
rough minimum estimates have been constructed () using early brood stock
collection efforts, some sporadic intentional surveys and more recently,
methodical surveys using visual and imaging sonar based counts (Haggerty
et al. 2009; Haggerty 2013 and 2014; Hinton and Cooke 2016; Hinton and
Cooke 2019; MFM 2020). Estimating beach spawners as the difference
between fish entering the lake and fish entering Umbrella Creek is
problematic due to substantial uncertainty in both estimates, mortality
between entry in to the lake and Umbrella Creek, and additional
tributary spawners that are not accounted for (). While the available
data for beach spawners does not allow for estimates of total abundance,
there is, for example, strong evidence that from 2005 to 2010 there were
very few beach spawners ().

Extensive spawner surveys in the 70's, prior to the hatchery program,
found no spawning in the tributaries (Haggerty et al. 2009, 3.4.3.1.2).
The extent to which the tributaries were used prior to this time is
uncertain with some attributing part of the decline in the overall
population to loss of tributary spawners while others argue tributary
spawning was not significant (Haggerty et al. 2009, 3.4.3.1.2). After
initiation of a hatchery program in the 1980s, spawning aggregations in
Umbrella Creek and Big River increased in size through the 1990s. The
run size for Umbrella Creek from 2000 to 2011 averaged 48% of the Ozette
total run size, and for some years comprised well over 90% (, ).

Historic and current run timing are not well characterized for the beach
spawning aggregates. However, beach spawning survey data from 1978
(Dlugokenski et al. 1981) suggested a more extended run timing than is
currently observed. Spawners were observed on Allen's Beach in late
February, while surveys in the last decade have not extended past
January (latest survey date since 2000 was January 15). However, this
earlier end date may be due at least in part to limited effort in recent
years. During the 1978 season, peak run timing at Olsen's beach occurred
a month earlier than at Allen's beach. This difference has not been
observed in more recent surveys.

A number of studies have suggested varying degrees of genetic
differentiation between spawning locations and between the four cohort
lineages (Hershberger *et al.* 1982; Gustafson *et al.* 1997; Crewson
*et al.* 2001; Hawkins 2004). In samples from both 1995 (Gustafson et
al. 1997) and 2000 (Crewson et al. 2001), there was some evidence for
genetic differences between spawners on Olsen's and Allen's beaches. The
two beaches are on opposite sides of the South end of the lake,
separated by more than 3km. Samples from the Umbrella Creek aggregate
were closer to the Olsen's beach spawners where most of the brood stock
was taken (Crewson et al. 2001). There were also observed differences
between the 4 cohort lineages (Crewson et al. 2001; Gustafson et
al. 1997; Hawkins 2004), suggesting that the dominant 4 year cycle has
maintained some genetic differentiation. Two analyses that compared
Kokanee and Sockeye found large genetic differences (Crewson et
al. 2001; Hawkins 2004). For a summary of these genetic studies see
Haggerty et al. (2009).

The estimated fraction of hatchery origin fish returning to Lake Ozette
has been low in recent years (averaging 6% from 2000-2018). However, the
large contribution of the hatchery supplemented tributary aggregations
to the population as a whole allows for larger total hatchery fractions
when Umbrella Creek hatchery fraction is high. For example, in 2012,
over half (52%) of the estimated 5152 fish returning to Umbrella Creek
were designated as hatchery origin.

![Figure 7 - Number of live and dead fish observed in beach counts.
These are not estimates of total beach spawners. Points are colored by
approximate effort (i.e. number and quality of
surveys).](./media/media/image124.png){width="6.0in" height="3.0in"}

Figure - Number of live and dead fish observed in beach counts. These
are not estimates of total beach spawners. Points are colored by
approximate effort (i.e. number and quality of surveys).

### BIOLOGICAL STATUS RELATIVE TO RECOVERY GOALS

The proposed criteria for the VSP parameters set in the recovery plan
for Lake Ozette sockeye (NMFS 2009) are:

**Abundance**: "...should range in abundance between 31,250 and 121,000
adult spawners, over a number of years (Rawson *et al.* 2008)."

**Productivity**: "...the population growth rate would have to be
increasing until a viable abundance is achieved."

**Spatial Structure:** \"...have multiple spawning aggregations along
the lake beaches, which are the known historical spawning areas. The
certainty that the population achieves a viable condition would be
further increased if spawning aggregations in one or more tributaries to
the lake were also established."

**Diversity:** "...one or more persistent spawning aggregations from
each major genetic and life history group historically present within
that population. And a viable population of sockeye in Lake Ozette also
would maintain the historical genetic diversity and distinctness between
anadromous sockeye salmon and kokanee salmon in Lake Ozette."

As there is only one population within this ESU, all of the above
criteria must be met for that population for the ESU to be considered
viable (See eg McElhaney et al 2000 "Some populations should exceed VSP
guidelines...This guideline is particularly relevant if an ESU consists
of a single population." And "McElhaney 2000: "A population must meet
all of the viable population guidelines to be considered viable with
respect to \[population size\].") Because in this case the ESU is a
single population, all viable population guidelines must be met for the
ESU to be considered viable.

**Current status of Abundance and Productivity**

There is sufficient data to determine that the total Ozette abundance is
well below the desired lower bound, although the population has
increased since that last review and over the past 15 years (, ). Over
the last few decades productivity for the total Ozette population has
exhibited a 10 to 20 year cyclical pattern alternating between negative
and positive values. Average rates over the last 5 and 15 year periods
have been slightly positive although we may be entering a negative
phase.

**Current status of Spatial structure and Diversity**

Defining a historical base line and assessing the current state of the
spatial structure and diversity of the population is difficult due to a
paucity of data. In particular without estimates of abundance for the
beach spawning aggregates, it is difficult to assess the degree to which
the existing spatial structure is robust to demographic variability.
This is especially important since both the abundance and distribution
of the beach spawners has declined to a small percentage of historical
levels. While abundance estimates for beach spawners are not available,
there is relatively strong evidence for a substantial decline during the
mid to late 2000's when very few spawners were observed with moderate
levels of survey effort (). There is also some indication that run
timing may have changed since the 1970s.

Currently, it appears that the Umbrella Creek Hatchery program has
successfully introduced a tributary spawning aggregate. This has
increased the spatial and possibly genetic structure of the population
while maintaining a genetic reservoir initially established with beach
spawning fish. The addition of the tributary aggregate may have
increased or stabilized overall abundance although this is not yet
confirmed by the abundance trends.

Straying of tributary fish into the beach spawning locations may pose a
threat to the beach spawning aggregate since the tributary spawning
aggregate appears to be much larger than the beach spawning aggregate
for some years. To date there appears to be little exchange between the
beach spawning and tributary spawning aggregates. The estimated
proportion of beach spawners that are hatchery origin has been very low,
with pHOS estimates ranging from 0.5% to 0.8% (MFM 2015). In addition 1)
there is some evidence that tributary and beach spawning aggregates
coexisted in the past 2) the source of the hatchery program was Ozette
fish, 3) the hatchery brood stock is currently naturally spawning
tributary fish, 4) there is little evidence of resource limitations in
the lake for rearing and 5) the level of hatchery intervention into the
natural sockeye salmon life cycle is minimal (egg boxes producing fry).
However, interactions between these two aggregates should continue to be
monitored. In recent years, very few carcasses have been recovered
making it difficult to detect any potential changes in hatchery fraction
(only 1 carcass recovered from 2015-2018; Hinton and Cooke 2019; MFM
2020).

Assessment of Lake Ozette Sockeye population status is substantially
hampered by gaps in our knowledge of population abundance and structure.
In particular, because the beach spawning aggregate is considered the
core group of interest for recovery (NMFS 2009), and the abundance of
the beach spawning aggregate is not estimated, it is difficult to fully
assess the population status.

**Recommendations:**

-   Develop and implement a method for enumerating the beach spawning
    aggregate. This is a difficult task, but is essential for evaluating
    the status of the population.

-   In order to characterize any spatial or temporal changes in beach
    spawning, include occasional surveys that are more spatially
    extensive and capture the beginning and end of the spawn timing
    distribution.

-   Improve estimates of total population size. The current method of
    enumeration, imaging sonar, was only recently adopted. Further
    experimentation with placement and additional resources devoted to
    review of imagery and analysis will be necessary to ensure reliable
    estimates.

-   Improve estimates of the tributary spawners. Specifically
    re-evaluate the mark-recapture methodology for Umbrella Creek
    estimates and develop a method for estimating run size in the other
    tributaries.

-   Develop and implement regular sampling to estimate hatchery fraction
    and age structure for each of the aggregates. Also investigate
    alternative approaches for estimating overall hatchery origin and
    age structure.

-   Improve understanding of genetic structure within the population
    through additional genetic analysis.

-   Resurvey beach spawning habitat to assess status and trends in
    spawning habitat availability.

-   If beach habitat restoration is planned, consider increased spawner
    and habitat surveys at those sites before and after to allow for
    monitoring of restoration effectiveness.

### UPDATED BIOLOGICAL RISK SUMMARY

Based on an evolving understanding of both the status and the
uncertainty in the status of the Lake Ozette Sockeye beach spawning
aggregates, the biological risk for Lake Ozette Sockeye is determined to
have increased somewhat, largely due to a clearer understanding of the
poor condition of the beach spawning aggregates. Extinction risk is
determined by our best prediction of the demographic probability of
extinction and the uncertainty in that prediction. More uncertainty will
result in a higher risk. In the case of Lake Ozette Sockeye, this
uncertainty contributes substantially to our evaluation of extinction
risk.. Stated otherwise, due to substantial uncertainty in the historic
and current abundance and structure of the population, it is not
possible to rule out further decline in the VSP parameters over the next
couple decades, which would increase overall risk. Risk appears to be
trending higher because:

1.  For the last four decades, the abundance of Lake Ozette Sockeye
    natural adult spawners ranged from 438 to 12,829, well below the
    lower viability threshold of 31,250 -- 121,000 viable population
    range established in the 2009 NMFS TRT Report and the Ozette Lake
    Recovery Plan.

2.  Over the last few decades, estimated productivity for the total
    Ozette population has alternated between positive and negative
    periods. While estimated average productivity over the most recent 5
    and 15 year periods has been positive, we may now be entering
    another negative phase. This cyclical pattern in productivity makes
    it difficult to interpret historical and predict future trends in
    productivity, and may increase risk due to the potential for
    sustained periods of negative productivity.

3.  There is accumulating evidence of a sustained reduction in abundance
    and distribution of beach spawners, aggravating the conditions
    originally identified by the PSTRT that "the limited distribution of
    Lake Ozette sockeye spawners \[at that time \] put the ESU at high
    risk"

4.  Critical gaps in our knowledge of the beach spawning aggregates
    prevents any quantitative assessment of abundance or trends of this
    portion of the ESU that are considered critical for recovery.

5.  The Lake Ozette Sockeye ESU consists of a single population, which
    by itself increases risk of extinction because of limited
    demographic diversity and redundancy.

## Oregon Coast coho salmon ESU

### Brief description of ESU {#brief-description-of-esu}

The Oregon Coast coho salmon ESU (OC ESU) consists of coho salmon
populations on the Oregon coast from Cape Blanco to the mouth of the
Columbia River (85 FR 81822, Figure 114).  The geographic area is
physically diverse, and includes numerous rocky headlands and an
extensive area with sand dunes.  Most rivers within the ESU drain the
west slope of the Coast Range, with the exception the Umpqua River,
which extends through the Coast Range to drain the Cascade Mountains
(Weitkamp *et al.* 1995).  While most coho salmon populations within the
ESU use stream and riverine habitats, there is extensive winter lake
rearing by juvenile coho salmon in several large lake systems.

The Oregon and Northern California Coasts Technical Recovery Team
(ONCCTRT) evaluated the historical population structure of the 56
populations that were likely to have been present historically within
the ESU (Lawson *et al.* 2007).  This was conducted with a simple
conceptual model of population demographics, which classifies
populations based on their isolation and persistence.  Populations that
appeared likely to have been capable of persisting in isolation were
classified as independent (21 populations).  Small populations in
smaller coastal basins may not have be able to maintain themselves
continuously for periods as long as hundreds of years without strays
from adjacent populations and were classified as dependent populations
(36 populations; Lawson *et al*. 2007). 

The ONCCTRT used the substantial genetic and biogeographic structure
within the ESU to identify biogeographic strata among populations
(Lawson *et al.* 2007).  These strata represent the genetic and
geographic similarities among populations such that preservation of
sustainable populations within each stratum will conserve major genetic
diversity within the ESU, and spread risks of losing genetic and
geographic diversity due to catastrophes (Wainwright *et al.* 2008). 
The ONCCTRT determined that the four monitoring areas (North Coast, Mid
Coast, Mid-South Coast, Umpqua) identified by ODFW for Oregon coast coho
salmon, in addition to the lakes complex confirmed by Ford *et al*.
(2004), reflected the geography, ecology and genetics of the landscape
(Lawson *et al*. 2007). Accordingly, the five strata each contain
between 3 (Lakes) and 29 (Mid Coast) populations (Figure 114).

![](./media/media/image125.tiff){width="5.797340332458442in"
height="7.5in"}

Figure . Map of the Oregon Coast coho salmon spawning and rearing areas,
illustrating populations and major population groups.

### Summary of previous status conclusions {#summary-of-previous-status-conclusions}

*2005*

The 2005 status review conclusions for the ESU as a whole reflected
ongoing concerns for the long-term health of this ESU: a majority of BRT
opinion was in the "likely to become endangered" category, with a
substantial minority falling in the "not likely to become endangered"
category (Good *et al*. 2005).  Although they considered relatively high
returns in 2001 and 2002 to be encouraging, most members thought that
the factor responsible for the increases was more likely to be unusually
favorable marine productivity conditions rather than improvement in
freshwater productivity.  The majority of BRT members thought that to
have a high degree of confidence that the ESU was healthy, high spawner
escapements should be maintained for a number of years and the
freshwater habitat should demonstrate the capability of supporting high
juvenile production from years of high spawner abundance.

The 2005 status review considered the long-term decline in productivity
to be the most serious concern for this ESU.  With all directed harvest
for these populations eliminated, harvest management (i.e., reducing
harvest rates) could no longer compensate for declining productivity. 
The BRT was concerned that the long-term decline in productivity
reflected deteriorating conditions in freshwater habitat and that the
ESU would likely experience very serious risks of local extinctions
during the next cycle of poor ocean conditions.  With the cushion
provided by strong returns in 2001−2003, the 2003 BRT had much less
concern about short-term risks associated with abundance than did
earlier BRTs.

*2010*

A thorough status review for Oregon Coast coho was conducted by Stout
*et al*. (2012) in response to a delisting petition.  In that review,
the overall assessment of extinction risk to the ESU, taking into
account both the demographic risk parameters and an evaluation of
threats, indicated considerable uncertainty about its status, with the
BRT assessment evenly split between moderate risk and low risk at 47%
each, and a small minority of weight (6%) at high risk.  This
uncertainty was due largely to the difficulty in balancing the clear
improvements in some aspects of the ESU's status over the prior
approximately 15 years (increased abundance, lower harvest rates,
reduced hatchery risks) against persistent threats potentially driving
the longer term status of the ESU (habitat degradation, climate change),
which probably had not changed over the same time frame and were
predicted to degrade in the future.  In addition, the BRT noted that
accurately predicting the long-term trend of a complex system is
inherently difficult, and this also led to some uncertainty in the
overall risk assessment.

*2015*

The Oregon Coast coho salmon ESU was included in the 5-year assessment
of listed salmonid DPSs in 2015 (NWFSC 2015). The 2015 update included
updates of existing data time series through return year 2014. These
included spawner abundances, exploitation rates, estimates of the
proportion of wild spawners, and marine survival. It also included an
updated assessment of the Decision Support System (DSS; see next
section). The 2015 update described many positive trends in population
abundance and escapement due in large part to the largest returns of
wild coho to the ESU in 2011 and 2014 (both over 338,000 fish) since the
1970s, paired with low harvest rates. The DSS scores for population,
stratum, and ESU persistence and sustainability also generally improved.
The ESU persistence score (0.73) indicated high certainty that the ESU
would persist, or not go extinct over a 100-year period including the
ability to survive prolonged periods of adverse environmental
conditions. The ESU sustainability score (0.23) indicated low to
moderate certainty that the ESU was sustainable, or that it could
maintain its genetic legacy and long-term adaptive potential for the
foreseeable future. Both scores were higher than scores generated by
previous runs of the DSS. However, the 2015 update cautioned that the
positive trends were unlikely to continue into the near future starting
with juvenile entering the ocean in 2014 due to the formation of "The
blob". It further advised waiting to see how populations fare during the
expected downturn before reconsidering the status of Oregon Coast coho.

### Decision support system for oregon coast coho salmon

The ONCCTRT developed a knowledge-based Decision Support System (DSS)
for the Oregon Coast coho salmon ESU (Wainwright *et al.* 2008).  The
DSS was designed to evaluate the biological sustainability of the entire
ESU, where 'biological sustainability' implies that "a population is
able to survive prolonged periods of adverse environmental conditions,
while maintaining its genetic legacy and long-term adaptive potential"
((Wainwright *et al.* 2014) p. 278).  The DSS consists of a suite of
biological criteria that contribute to ESU sustainability.  These
criteria were expressed as logical propositions that could be evaluated
from empirical data or professional judgment.  At the lowest level,
propositions were evaluated from data collected at the watershed or
population scale, population-scale combinations were aggregated at the
stratum scale, and finally to the entire ESU (Wainwright et al. 2008,
Wainwright *et al*. 2014).

The DSS uses a diverse array of biological criteria to evaluate ESU
biological status. This list includes: watershed- and population-level
spawner and juvenile occupancy and distributions, population-specific
productivity, probability of persistence (from population viability
models), spawner abundance, artificial influence; and ESU-wide genetic
and phenotypic diversity (Wainwright *et al*. 2008).  Accordingly, the
DSS includes specific criteria for most of the categories discussed on
the following pages to evaluate the current status of Oregon Coast coho
salmon. 

Here, we provide scores from three evaluations of the DSS as indicators
of whether particular attributes of the ESU have been improving or
declining, in addition to values and trends in actual data on population
attributes (e.g., spawner abundance, marine survival). The first DSS
assessment we provide here was conducted as part of the 2012 BRT
evaluation, which included data through the 2009 return year (Stout *et
al.* 2012). The second DSS run was conducted by Mark Lewis (ODFW), and
used data through the 2014 return year (Lewis 2015). The third
assessment was also conducted by Mark Lewis and uses data through the
2019 return year (Lewis 2020). Scores provided here for the 2012
evaluation were calculated by M. Lewis and differ slightly from those
found in Stout et al. (2012) due to changes in GIS coverage (which
changes 5th field watershed boundaries), and other issues with the 2012
assessment identified in Lewis (2015). These changes allow direct
comparison of the three DSS assessments, which was previously not
possible due to methodological differences. (Direct comparisons to the
original 2008 assessment are presently not possible due to these
methodological differences).

 In using the DSS to evaluate current levels of ESU persistence and
sustainability, it should be noted that three criteria have not been
updated since first calculated by Wainwright et al. (2008). First,
population-level probability of persistence (PP-2) requires results from
four population viability models; these models have not been rerun. Part
of the rationale for not updating this parameter is that the relative
vulnerabilities of populations assessed by the PVA models are unlikely
to change with the addition of a few more years of data (Stout et al.
2012). Second, population functionality (PF-1) is based on habitat
quantity, and was not updated by Stout et al. (2012) because it would
have required a major reanalysis of habitat data. Instead, Stout et al.
(2012) did an analysis of habitat data to look for trends in habitat
quality; no such analyses were conducted for either the 2015 or this
review. Third, the ESU-level criteria for diversity (ED-1, ED-2, ED-3)
have also not been updated since the DSS was originally evaluated
because they relied on professional judgment (Wainwright et al. 2008). 
Increases in abundance and productivity across all strata observed in
the previous assessment suggest ESU diversity has not decreased.
Accordingly, the DSS results provided here for all three assessments
reflect the original values for PP-2 and the ESU-level diversity
criteria, but PF-1(=habitat quality) is no longer included in
calculations of the whole ESU sustainability and persistence scores
(Lewis 2015, 2020).

### Description of new data available for this review

The available data for the Oregon coast coho salmon ESU are mainly
updates of existing data time series through return year 2019. These
include spawner abundances, exploitation rates, estimates of the
proportion of wild spawners, marine survival, and an updated assessment
of the DSS through return year 2019.  New to this assessment are wild
spawner data for dependent populations in the North and Mid Coast
strata, which have not been included in previous assessments.

The 2015 update provided new marine survival estimates for wild Oregon
Coast coho salmon from the Life Cycle Monitoring (LCM) sites (Suring *et
al.* 2012) (Suring *et al.* 2015). These rates are estimated from the
number of smolts passing downstream through smolt traps and subsequent
numbers of jacks and adults returning 1 and 2 years later, respectively.
The coastwide estimate of marine survival is the average survival from
all LCM sites adjusted for harvest (E. Suring, ODFW, unpublished data). 

The 2015 update used marine survival data from six LCM sites: Nehalem
River (North Coast stratum), Siletz, Yaquina, and Alsea Rivers (Mid
Coast stratum), Umpqua (Umpqua Stratum) and Coos River (mid-South Coast
stratum). Since the 2015 update, the Nehalem LCM site was terminated.
However, Suring (2017) demonstrated that coastwide marine survival
estimates that rely on only five sites were highly correlated to the
full six-site survival index (r2=0.99) without bias. Accordingly, the
LCM marine survival time series provided here is based on the five LCM
sites (E. Suring, ODFW, unpublished data).

### Abundance and productivity {#abundance-and-productivity}

Prior to 1940 recruitment of adults to the Oregon Coast ESU is estimated
to have averaged about 800,000 fish, ranging from 400,000 to 2,000,000.
After 1940 typical recruitments dropped to about 300,000, peaking at
800,000. Another drop following the ocean regime shift in 1976 led to
recruitments in the range of 100,000, with a low of 26,000 in 1997
(Stout et al. 2012). Spawner escapement has shown a different pattern
due to large changes in harvest management. Prior to 1940 ocean and
in-river exploitation rates are estimated to have been about 50%. They
rose through the 1950s and 1960s with peak exploitation rates between
80% and 90% in the 1970s. Abundance and harvest started to decline in
the 1980s until fisheries were closed in 1993 due to extreme low
abundance and poor marine survival. During the period from 1955 to 1993
spawner escapements were in the range of 50,000 even as recruitment
ranged up to 800,000 fish (Stout et al. 2012).

Caldwell and Cramer (2015) argue that these historic estimates of
recruit and spawner abundances may be too high due to methodological
changes in how both spawners and especially harvest rates were
estimated. They propose using the recruitment time series for the
1950s-1980s developed by Lawson (1992), which indicates recruitment
during 1950-1990 that is substantially below current historic estimates.
For example, the corrected time series gives recruitment averaging
roughly 300,000 during the 1950s (vs. 400,000 in the currently-used
historic reconstruction), 200,000 during the 1960s and 1970s (vs.
350,000), and 100,000 in the 1980s (vs. 150,000). Use of the Lawson
recruitment time series indicates the timing of the large decrease in
abundance occurred before 1950, not afterwards, as presently assumed.

Regardless, Oregon coast coho salmon reached extremely low levels in the
late 1990s, when 22,800-47,400 spawners were estimated across the entire
ESU (Figure 116, Figure 117; Table 65). Since that time, management
actions by ODFW to dramatically decrease harvest and hatchery
production, paired with favorable ocean conditions have contributed to a
strong rebound of Oregon coast coho (Falcy & Suring 2018). High spawning
escapements in 2011 and 2014 (over 338,000 wild spawners) likely
resulted in the reestablishment of many of the natural processes
associated with salmon populations, although these levels are still
below those seen as recently as the mid-1970s (although see discussion
below). Marine survival appears to be the principal driver of variation
in abundance, and poor ocean conditions since 2014 have again resulted
in lower spawner abundances, but not as low as was observed in the late
1990s.

The spawner abundance of coho salmon within the Oregon Coast ESU varies
by time and population. The large populations (abundances \> 6,000
spawners since 2015) include the Coos, Coquille, Nehalem, Tillamook,
Alsea, Siuslaw, and Lower Umpqua Rivers (Figure 117, Table 65). The
total abundance of spawners within the ESU generally increased between
1999 and 2014, before dropping in 2015 and remaining low (Figure 116).
The 2014 Oregon Coast coho salmon return (355,600 wild and hatchery
spawners) was the highest since at least the 1950's (2011 was the 2nd
highest with 352,200; ODFW 2015), while the 2015 return (56,000 fish)
was the lowest since the late 1990s. Most independent and dependent
populations show synchronously high abundances in 2002-2003, 2009-2011
and 2014, and low abundances in 2007, 2012-2013, and now 2015-2019 
(Figure 117), indicating the overriding importance of marine survival to
returns of Oregon Coast coho salmon.  

While marine survival is important for Oregon Coast coho salmon (Falcy &
Suring 2018), so is high quality freshwater habitat that provides
productive rearing for juvenile rearing, adult spawning, and egg
incubation.  These are also habitats that humans control and influence
through their actions across the landscape.  Of particular importance to
Oregon coast coho salmon BRTs and TRTs (Wainwright et al 2008, Stout et
al. 2012) are the need for American beaver (*Castor canadensis*) within
the ESU.  Beavers are keystone species that have wide-ranging impacts on
stream ecosystems because their dams create pools that serve as high
quality habitat for a number of plant, invertebrate, and vertebrate
species, including juvenile coho salmon.  However, widespread historical
removal of beavers has resulted in beaver populations that are a small
fraction of their historical abundance (Pollock *et al.* 2003; Pollock
*et al.* 2015). Loss of high quality beaver-associated habitat has been
identified as limiting the production of Oregon Coast coho salmon (see
review in Stout et al. 2012).

![https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/ECUyOHOJTtmFSU3IrNQyXtEtvtLeXLOiV58f0Rv8M1UMZr7qpWjPAYpurfbNhIi_lF0GGmx73fgzord8wQlj8ezCjYw5XWlpPdjMSRk_tbjh3fWYTfIVXcmeASkuHs\--EWf8lw](./media/media/image126.png){width="5.40625in"
height="3.4791666666666665in"}

Figure . Marine survival rates for Oregon Production Index
hatchery-produced coho salmon, 1980-2019, and Oregon Coast Natural coho
salmon from life cycle monitoring sites, 1999-2019.  Data from PFMC
2020, Suring et al. 2015, and E. Suring (ODFW, unpubl. data).

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/qY-l0yl9C3DRecLhVbJt1k35FkLZSE38UU2xEbpul0tZlrHHov9kQUREfxjLxrvfgtsdE1IuMXJNvypW062D7SDPVN5jHIo2a6kElzJarhaIuYm9HEZkH0xSXnDgFx4SzoAsOQ](./media/media/image127.png){width="5.4375in"
height="3.6875in"}

Figure . Estimated abundance of wild natural spawners in the five strata
for Oregon Coast coho salmon ESU, 1995-2019.

5 year geometric mean wild raw spawner abundances increased from 17 --
7,228 per population in the 1990 to 1994 time period, to 189 -- 23,741
for the 2010 to 2014 time period, which were the highest in the time
series (Table 65). Populations decreased during the most recent period
(2015-2019) to 67 -- 6,740. All populations exhibited a substantial
decrease in the geometric mean abundance between the previous 5 year
period (2010-2014) and the current one (2015-2019), ranging from -55%
(Siletz River) to -75% (Tenmile Lake) (Table 65)   

A similar pattern is observed with 15 year trends in log wild spawner
abundances (Table 66) : all were positive during the 1990-2005 period
and most were near zero or slightly negative during the 2004-2019
period.  Furthermore, trends during the earlier 15 year interval
(1990-2004) were steeper and no confidence intervals overlapped zero,
while the recent trends for all populations are relatively flat and the
confidence intervals for all but six populations include zero (Table
66). The six populations that don't include zero have negative trends
and are located in the Lakes (Siltcoos, Tahkenitch, and Tenmile Lakes)
or Mid-South Coast (Coos Bay, Floras Cr, Sixes River) strata. 

Patterns of wild spawner abundances including short and long term trends
for dependent populations in the North and Mid Coasts were similar to
larger independent populations (Figure 117).  Short term trends declined
by -59% and -51%, respectively, between the two 5 year periods
(2010-2015 to 2015-2019; Table 65).  Long term trends were slightly
positive (0.02 and 0.05, respectively) during 2004-2019 period (Table
66), although the 15 year trend confidence intervals included zero. 
Spawner to spawner ratios show the same cycle of positive and negative
stanzas displayed by independent populations (Figure 118).  Given that
small populations are more likely to "wink out" than large populations
due to stochastic processes, these patterns suggest small dependent
populations on the Oregon Coast were not unduly impacted by unfavorable
ocean conditions and respond much like their larger neighbors. 

Abundance and productivity is captured by three criteria in the DSS
(Table 64), population productivity (PP-1; productivity \[natural return
ratio\] at low abundance), probability of persistence (PP-2; based on
population viability models which have not been updated since 2008), and
critical abundance (PP-3; peak spawner density during lowest years).
Scores for population productivity (PP-1) increased in half the
populations (11 of 21) between runs in 2012 and 2015. Between 2015 and
2020 DSS runs, scores increased in 7 populations, stayed constant in 2
populations, and the rest declined (Table 64). The average score across
all populations increased from 0.69 in 2012 to 0.71 in 2015 and then
declined to 0.58 in 2020. The number of populations with a score of at
least 0.3 (=moderate to high certainty that population production at low
abundance is sufficient to withstand an extended period of adverse
environmental conditions) was 19 in both 2012 and 2015, but decreased to
17 populations in 2020.

Scores for PP-3 (critical abundance) increased or remained stable at 1.0
between the 2012 and 2015 assessments for all populations except the
Sixes River, and mean scores increased from 0.40 to 0.66 (Table 64).
Between the 2015 and 2020 DSS runs, however, PP-3 scores decreased in
half the populations (12 of 21) although the mean score across all
populations in 2020 (0.65) was only 0.01 lower than the mean 2015 (0.66)
score. The number of populations with a score of at least 0.3 for PP-3
(=moderate to high certainty that population abundance is maintained
above levels where small-population demographic risks are likely to
occur) went from 15 populations in 2012 to 18 populations in both 2015
and 2020. 

The overall Population Persistence (PP) scores (based on PP-1 and PP-3)
for individual populations from the most recent run were positive (i.e.,
low to high certainty the population was persistent) for all but three
populations (Necanicum, Salmon, and Sixes River). This is an improvement
over previous runs when four populations had negative scores (Necanicum,
Salmon, Sixes River, and North Umpqua). However, mean PP scores in 2020
were slightly lower (0.45) than in 2015 (0.52) but higher than mean
scores in 2012 (0.35) (Lewis 2020).

Marine survival has been highly variable over the last four decades
(Figure 115). Marine survival rates for the Oregon Production Index
(OPI), are estimated from hatchery coho from the Columbia and Oregon and
California coasts. OPI coho are mostly from the Columbia River and
subject to in-river as well as marine influences. Marine survival rates
for Oregon Coastal natural (OCN) coho are available from ODFW's Life
Cycle Monitoring sites starting with the 1999 return (E. Suring, unpubl.
data, Suring et al. 2012, 2015). As described under "new data", above,
the OCN marine survival time series provided here is based on only five
LCM sites, because one LCM site was terminated since the 2015 update (E.
Suring, ODFW, unpublished data).

In general, marine survival of OCN coho salmon is roughly twice as high
as OPI coho, but also shows different trends (Figure 115).  Mean
survival in 1999-2019 was 6.6% for OCN compared to 2.5% for OPI,
although in some years the rates are quite similar (e.g., 1999, 2006,
2007, 2015). The trends for both times series increased between return
years 1999 and 2014, due to low marine survival prior to 2001 and
extremely high marine survival for fish returning in 2014 (14.5% for
OCN, 6.5% for OPI). Marine survival rates for both OCN and OPI coho
returning in 2015 plummeted to 2.2% and 1.3%, respectively.  OPI has
remained below 1.6% since then, while OCN rebounded somewhat in 2017
(7.7%) before dropping again to 3.9% in 2019. Compared to marine
survival rates during the earlier assessments, OCN marine survival rates
averaged over the most recent 5 years (5.0%; 2015-2019) are
substantially lower than in 2010-2014 (8.9%), which were the most recent
5 years used in the 2015 assessment (NWFSC 2015).  However, current OCN
rates are similar to the 5 year time period before that (2005-2009;
5.1%), which were the most recent years used by Stout et al. (2012). By
contrast, mean OPI marine survival rates in the most recent 5 years
(1.3%) are less than half the rates during the two prior 5 year time
periods (both 2.8%).

![](./media/media/image128.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="8.411805555555556in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in estimated total (thick black line, with 95%
confidence internal in gray) and natural (thin red line) population
spawning abundance.  In portions of a time series where a population has
no annual estimates but smoothed spawning abundance is estimated from
correlations with other populations the smoothed estimate is shown in
light gray. Points show the annual raw spawning abundance
estimates.  For some trends the smoothed estimate may be influenced by
earlier data points not included in the plot.

![https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/E3VN3IFa0LJseWv8DAXvklK_EnkVV0m1kc8CtfK2YwA4ykBbs2NGbho2Q28sASIbVQufqN0RArGvnp5FG62NOfcolsvIDQvZH1ADczDxTOGoSQXmvoASxJi6fzyQ6UBi2IEUqQ](./media/media/image129.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="7.552083333333333in"}

Figure . Trends in population productivity, estimated as the log of the
smoothed natural spawning abundance in year *t*  - smoothed natural
spawning abundance in year (*t* -- 3).

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Decision                                                                                                                                                                                    
                         Support                                                                                                                                                                                    
                         System                                                                                                                                                                                     
                         criterion                                                                                                                                                                                  
                         and                                                                                                                                                                                        
                         assessment                                                                                                                                                                                 
                         year                                                                                                                                                                                       
  --------- ------------ ------------ -------- -------- ----- -------- -------- -------- ----- -------- -------- -------- ----- -------- -------- -------- ----- -------- -------- -------- ----- -------- -------- --------
  Stratum   Population                PP-1                             PP-3                             PD-1                             PD-2                             PD-3                             PD-4      

  ** **                  2012         2015     2020           2012     2015     2020           2012     2015     2020           2012     2015     2020           2012     2015     2020           2012     2015     2020

  N Coast   Necanicum    0.95         0.89     0.63           0.30     0.68     0.45           0.01     0.02     0.02           0.35     0.92     0.89           0.82     0.92     0.80           0.97     0.71     0.36

  N Coast   Nehalem      0.80         0.99     1.00           0.81     0.83     0.54           0.83     0.87     0.89           0.66     0.79     0.90           0.45     0.53     0.27           0.51     0.78     0.77

  N Coast   Tillamook    0.90         0.95     0.95           0.42     0.76     0.66           0.12     0.14     0.15           0.42     0.79     0.94           0.23     0.61     0.47           0.64     0.85     0.99

  N Coast   Nestucca     0.82         0.95     0.92           0.38     0.43     0.41           0.14     0.16     0.16           0.92     0.86     1.00           0.20     0.52     0.49           0.92     0.50     0.13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

  Mid Coast Salmon       -0.51        -0.81    -0.83          -0.94    -0.71    0.43           -1.00    -1.00    -1.00          -1.00    0.92     0.72           0.64     0.57     0.35           1.00     1.00     1.00

  Mid Coast Siletz       0.91         1.00     0.83           0.11     0.86     0.84           0.08     0.10     0.11           0.67     0.93     0.99           0.51     0.90     0.97           0.93     1.00     1.00

  Mid Coast Yaquina      0.97         0.89     0.97           0.44     0.93     0.92           0.30     0.33     0.35           0.69     0.93     0.94           0.84     0.95     0.93           1.00     1.00     1.00

  Mid Coast Beaver       0.97         0.99     -0.10          0.93     1.00     1.00           0.03     0.04     0.04           0.86     1.00     0.99           1.00     1.00     1.00           1.00     1.00     1.00

  Mid Coast Alsea        0.63         0.86     0.59           0.02     0.68     0.84           0.18     0.20     0.22           0.97     0.98     1.00           0.45     0.85     0.92           0.83     1.00     1.00

  Mid Coast Siuslaw      0.89         0.77     0.52           0.07     0.81     0.82           0.98     1.00     1.00           0.81     0.91     1.00           0.53     0.72     0.79           0.68     0.89     0.98

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

  Lakes     Siltcoos     0.81         0.88     0.09           1.00     1.00     1.00           0.45     0.49     0.452          0.99     0.99     0.93           1.00     1.00     1.00           1.00     1.00     1.00

  Lakes     Tahkenitch   0.69         0.84     0.58           1.00     1.00     1.00           0.24     0.26     0.242          0.95     0.99     0.96           1.00     1.00     1.00           1.00     1.00     1.00

  Lakes     Tenmile      0.96         0.78     0.84           1.00     1.00     1.00           0.91     0.97     0.811          0.98     0.98     1.00           1.00     1.00     1.00           -0.36    -0.23    0.63

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

  Umpqua    Lower U.     0.68         0.76     0.89           0.73     0.84     0.81           0.80     0.85     0.88           0.42     0.93     0.99           0.78     0.85     0.77           0.61     0.85     0.96

  Umpqua    Middle U.    0.73         0.66     0.74           0.22     0.48     0.19           0.26     0.28     0.29           0.35     0.99     1.00           0.25     0.39     0.09           0.22     0.66     0.91

  Umpqua    North U.     -0.96        -0.50    0.38           0.50     0.89     0.86           -0.69    -0.64    -0.59          -0.96    0.13     0.34           -0.52    -0.42    -0.48          -0.66    -0.64    -0.50

  Umpqua    South U.     0.92         0.61     0.07           0.64     0.82     0.29           0.21     0.24     0.24           0.50     0.53     -0.04          0.06     0.28     0.06           0.14     0.35     0.64

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

  Mid-S Cst Coos         0.92         0.91     0.76           0.58     0.91     0.80           1.00     1.00     1.00           0.94     0.97     0.98           0.73     0.88     0.64           0.85     0.70     0.89

  Mid-S Cst Coquille     0.96         0.92     0.67           0.84     0.91     0.80           1.00     1.00     1.00           0.98     0.96     1.00           0.68     0.78     0.62           0.80     0.93     0.80

  Mid-S Cst Floras       0.99         0.88     0.88           -0.46    0.14     0.37           0.12     0.15     0.14           0.81     1.00     1.00           0.21     0.74     0.73           1.00     1.00     1.00

  Mid-S Cst Sixes        0.52         0.76     0.82           -0.25    -0.35    -0.31          -0.96    -0.96    -0.95          0.17     0.74     1.00           -0.66    -0.42    -0.66          -0.42    0.17     0.27

  * *       *Mean score* *0.69*       *0.71*   *0.58*   * *   *0.40*   *0.66*   *0.65*   * *   *0.24*   *0.26*   *0.26*   * *   *0.55*   *0.87*   *0.88*   * *   *0.49*   *0.65*   *0.56*   * *   *0.60*   *0.69*   *0.75*
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 4%" />
<col style="width: 5%" />
<col style="width: 6%" />
<col style="width: 3%" />
<col style="width: 3%" />
<col style="width: 1%" />
<col style="width: 4%" />
<col style="width: 2%" />
<col style="width: 6%" />
<col style="width: 5%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 4%" />
<col style="width: 1%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 1%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
<col style="width: 6%" />
<col style="width: 6%" />
<col style="width: 2%" />
<col style="width: 4%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 0%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th colspan="2"> </th>
<th colspan="3"> </th>
<th colspan="16">Criteria and assessment year</th>
<th><p> OCC</p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p> </p>
<p>OCC</p></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Stratum</td>
<td colspan="2">Population</td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="3">PP</td>
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
<td>PS</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="3"><u> </u></td>
<td colspan="2">SS</td>
<td><u> </u></td>
<td colspan="2">Conservation</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong> </strong></td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>2012</td>
<td colspan="2">2015</td>
<td colspan="2">2020</td>
<td> </td>
<td>2012</td>
<td colspan="2">2015</td>
<td colspan="2">2020</td>
<td colspan="3"> </td>
<td>2012</td>
<td>2015</td>
<td colspan="2">2020</td>
<td>Plan status*</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>N Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Necanicum</td>
<td>-0.24</td>
<td colspan="2">-0.21</td>
<td colspan="2">-0.26</td>
<td> </td>
<td>-0.14</td>
<td colspan="2">-0.10</td>
<td colspan="2">-0.16</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>F</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>N Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Nehalem</td>
<td>0.84</td>
<td colspan="2">0.91</td>
<td colspan="2">0.76</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.67</td>
<td colspan="2">0.78</td>
<td colspan="2">0.63</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>N Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Tillamook</td>
<td>0.55</td>
<td colspan="2">0.68</td>
<td colspan="2">0.65</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.35</td>
<td colspan="2">0.50</td>
<td colspan="2">0.51</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>N Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Nestucca</td>
<td>0.57</td>
<td colspan="2">0.63</td>
<td colspan="2">0.61</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.44</td>
<td colspan="2">0.45</td>
<td colspan="2">0.41</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>N Coast</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2">0.39</td>
<td>0.47</td>
<td colspan="2">0.46</td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Mid Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Salmon</td>
<td>-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">-1.00</td>
<td> </td>
<td>-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>F</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Mid Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Siletz</td>
<td>0.36</td>
<td colspan="2">0.81</td>
<td colspan="2">0.76</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.35</td>
<td colspan="2">0.58</td>
<td colspan="2">0.58</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Mid Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Yaquina</td>
<td>0.65</td>
<td colspan="2">0.85</td>
<td colspan="2">0.87</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.60</td>
<td colspan="2">0.73</td>
<td colspan="2">0.74</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Mid Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Beaver</td>
<td>0.80</td>
<td colspan="2">0.82</td>
<td colspan="2">0.17</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.53</td>
<td colspan="2">0.56</td>
<td colspan="2">0.24</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Mid Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Alsea</td>
<td>0.28</td>
<td colspan="2">0.81</td>
<td colspan="2">0.76</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.33</td>
<td colspan="2">0.64</td>
<td colspan="2">0.64</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Mid Coast</td>
<td colspan="2">Siuslaw</td>
<td>0.38</td>
<td colspan="2">0.85</td>
<td colspan="2">0.71</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.49</td>
<td colspan="2">0.85</td>
<td colspan="2">0.80</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Mid Coast</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2">0.42</td>
<td>0.61</td>
<td colspan="2">0.61</td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Lakes</td>
<td colspan="2">Siltcoos</td>
<td>0.92</td>
<td colspan="2">0.95</td>
<td colspan="2">0.42</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.83</td>
<td colspan="2">0.85</td>
<td colspan="2">0.53</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Lakes</td>
<td colspan="2">Tahkenitch</td>
<td>0.78</td>
<td colspan="2">0.82</td>
<td colspan="2">0.72</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.66</td>
<td colspan="2">0.70</td>
<td colspan="2">0.64</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Lakes</td>
<td colspan="2">Tenmile</td>
<td>0.98</td>
<td colspan="2">0.90</td>
<td colspan="2">0.93</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.20</td>
<td colspan="2">0.34</td>
<td colspan="2">0.87</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Lakes</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2">0.66</td>
<td>0.70</td>
<td colspan="2">0.64</td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Umpqua</td>
<td colspan="2">Lower U.</td>
<td>0.74</td>
<td colspan="2">0.81</td>
<td colspan="2">0.85</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.65</td>
<td colspan="2">0.84</td>
<td colspan="2">0.87</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Umpqua</td>
<td colspan="2">Middle U.</td>
<td>0.45</td>
<td colspan="2">0.61</td>
<td colspan="2">0.43</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.31</td>
<td colspan="2">0.53</td>
<td colspan="2">0.38</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Umpqua</td>
<td colspan="2">North U.</td>
<td>-0.95</td>
<td colspan="2">-0.30</td>
<td colspan="2">0.52</td>
<td> </td>
<td>-0.95</td>
<td colspan="2">-0.57</td>
<td colspan="2">-0.41</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>F</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Umpqua</td>
<td colspan="2">South U.</td>
<td>0.80</td>
<td colspan="2">0.75</td>
<td colspan="2">0.26</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.33</td>
<td colspan="2">0.45</td>
<td colspan="2">0.14</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Umpqua</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2">0.32</td>
<td>0.49</td>
<td colspan="2">0.26</td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Mid-S Cst</td>
<td colspan="2">Coos</td>
<td>0.75</td>
<td colspan="2">0.89</td>
<td colspan="2">0.80</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.80</td>
<td colspan="2">0.87</td>
<td colspan="2">0.82</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Mid-S Cst</td>
<td colspan="2">Coquille</td>
<td>0.91</td>
<td colspan="2">0.93</td>
<td colspan="2">0.79</td>
<td> </td>
<td>0.87</td>
<td colspan="2">0.91</td>
<td colspan="2">0.80</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Mid-S Cst</td>
<td colspan="2">Floras</td>
<td>-0.21</td>
<td colspan="2">0.43</td>
<td colspan="2">0.61</td>
<td> </td>
<td>-0.10</td>
<td colspan="2">0.45</td>
<td colspan="2">0.52</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>P</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Mid-S Cst</td>
<td colspan="2">Sixes</td>
<td>-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">-1.00</td>
<td> </td>
<td>-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2">-1.00</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td>F</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Mid-S Cst</td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td> </td>
<td> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2"> </td>
<td colspan="2">0.35</td>
<td>0.66</td>
<td colspan="2">0.66</td>
<td> </td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><em> </em></td>
<td colspan="2"><em>Mean score</em></td>
<td><em>0.35</em></td>
<td colspan="2"><em>0.52</em></td>
<td colspan="2"><em>0.45</em></td>
<td><em> </em></td>
<td><em>0.25</em></td>
<td colspan="2"><em>0.40</em></td>
<td colspan="2"><em>0.36</em></td>
<td colspan="2"><em> </em></td>
<td colspan="2"><em> </em></td>
<td><em> </em></td>
<td colspan="2"><em> </em></td>
<td><em> </em></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

\*For the Oregon Coast Coho Conservation Plan minimum level of desired
status, populations must have positive Population Sustainability (PS)
scores to pass.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population   MPG         1990-1994   1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019   \%
                                                                                                   Change
  ------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------
  Necanicum R. North Coast 281 (468)   271 (412)   1794 (1897) 1097 (1175) 2079 (2094) 637 (645)   -69
                                                                                                   (-69)

  Nehalem R.   North Coast 2474 (7471) 1355 (2934) 20139       14485       11523       4812 (4849) -58
                                                   (20469)     (15091)     (11647)                 (-58)

  Tillamook    North Coast 425 (938)   590 (829)   4507 (5015) 5009 (5117) 8437 (8601) 2748 (2755) -67
  Bay                                                                                              (-68)

  Nestucca R.  North Coast 352 (412)   594 (678)   5269 (5394) 1318 (1327) 2764 (2812) 1860 (1860) -33
                                                                                                   (-34)

  N Coast Dep. North Coast                                     790 (794)   883 (890)   359 (360)   -59
                                                                                                   (-60)

  Salmon R.    Mid-Coast   17 (267)    44 (645)    272 (1186)  259 (1136)  1450 (1463) 357 (372)   -75
                                                                                                   (-75)

  Siletz R.    Mid-Coast   493 (930)   427 (597)   3765 (4278) 9628        10689       3447 (3447) -68
                                                               (10024)     (10697)                 (-68)

  Yaquina R.   Mid-Coast   546 (658)   1639 (1978) 5486 (5561) 5624 (5817) 9863 (9863) 3199 (3223) -68
                                                                                                   (-67)

  Alsea R.     Mid-Coast   1235 (1851) 527 (1300)  5556 (5800) 6486 (6510) 14090       5616 (5616) -60
                                                                           (14099)                 (-60)

  Beaver Ck.   Mid-Coast   347 (347)   655 (767)   2938 (3069) 1637 (1665) 2618 (2618) 812 (813)   -69
                                                                                                   (-69)

  Siuslaw R.   Mid-Coast   3175 (4554) 2324 (3032) 15762       11355       21675       8179 (8179) -62
                                                   (15781)     (11625)     (21913)                 (-63)

  Mid-Coast    Mid-Coast                                       1509 (1535) 1830 (1860) 890 (900)   -51
  Dep.                                                                                             (-52)

  Siltcoos Lk. Lakes       1517 (1568) 3430 (3468) 5451 (5481) 3699 (3702) 5545 (5550) 1571 (1571) -72
                                                                                                   (-72)

  Tahkenitch   Lakes       841 (843)   2176 (2206) 2439 (2445) 2851 (2868) 5509 (5513) 885 (889)   -84
  Lk.                                                                                              (-84)

  Tenmile Lk.  Lakes       2616 (2632) 5420 (5420) 8918 (8931) 9547 (9562) 9986        1684 (1684) -83
                                                                           (10008)                 (-83)

  Low. Umpqua  Umpqua      2904 (2976) 4197 (4390) 11348       10180       12862       7082 (7096) -45
  R.                                               (11758)     (10944)     (12874)                 (-45)

  Middle       Umpqua      2857 (3039) 1828 (1935) 7907 (8265) 5239 (5689) 8797 (8804) 2062 (2062) -77
  Umpqua R.                                                                                        (-77)

  N Umpqua R.  Umpqua      900 (2650)  939 (3276)  2729        2946 (6503) 4552 (5018) 1976 (2135) -57
                                                   (11356)                                         (-57)

  S Umpqua R.  Umpqua      1633 (2295) 3125 (4151) 6876 (7272) 8670 (9163) 18237       1977 (2326) -89
                                                                           (19055)                 (-88)

  Coos R.      Mid-South   7228 (8150) 4572 (4597) 19936       10048       15029       4071 (4071) -73
               Coast                               (20077)     (10116)     (15053)                 (-73)

  Coquille R.  Mid-South   3934 (4165) 4117 (4169) 12692       15598       23800       5386 (5386) -77
               Coast                               (13099)     (15629)     (23867)                 (-77)

  Floras/New   Mid-South               898 (1009)  2868 (2978) 863 (883)   3489 (3489) 898 (898)   -74
  R.           Coast                                                                               (-74)

  Sixes R.     Mid-South   103 (111)   146 (159)   134 (180)   118 (127)   189 (192)   125 (125)   -34
               Coast                                                                               (-35)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population          MPG              1990-2005        2004-2019
  ------------------- ---------------- ---------------- -----------------
  Necanicum R.        North Coast      0.16 (0.11,0.21) -0.04 (-0.12,
                                                        0.03)

  Nehalem R.          North Coast      0.19 (0.14,      -0.06 (-0.14,
                                       0.24)            0.01)

  Tillamook Bay       North Coast      0.21 (0.17,      -0.01 (-0.09,
                                       0.26)            0.06)

  Nestucca R.         North Coast      0.14 (0.09,      -0.03 (-0.11,
                                       0.19)            0.04)

  N Coast Dep.        North Coast                       0.02 (-0.06,
                                                        0.09)

  Salmon R.           Mid-Coast        0.24 (0.18,      0.01 (-0.1, 0.11)
                                       0.31)            

  Siletz R.           Mid-Coast        0.21 (0.17,      0.02 (-0.05, 0.1)
                                       0.26)            

  Yaquina R.          Mid-Coast        0.18 (0.12,      -0.04 (-0.12,
                                       0.23)            0.04)

  Alsea R.            Mid-Coast        0.17 (0.11,      0.01 (-0.07,
                                       0.24)            0.08)

  Beaver Ck.          Mid-Coast        0.13 (0.08,      -0.06 (-0.14,
                                       0.19)            0.01)

  Siuslaw R.          Mid-Coast        0.16 (0.11,      -0.03 (-0.11,
                                       0.21)            0.04)

  Mid-Coast Dep.      Mid-Coast                         0.05 (-0.03,
                                                        0.13)

  Siltcoos Lk.        Lakes            0.11 (0.06,      -0.1 (-0.17,
                                       0.15)            -0.02)

  Tahkenitch Lk.      Lakes            0.12 (0.07,      -0.08 (-0.16,
                                       0.17)            -0.01)

  Tenmile Lk.         Lakes            0.12 (0.07,      -0.11 (-0.19,
                                       0.16)            -0.04)

  Low. Umpqua R.      Umpqua           0.12 (0.07,      -0.05 (-0.12,
                                       0.17)            0.03)

  Middle Umpqua R.    Umpqua           0.11 (0.06,      -0.06 (-0.14,
                                       0.16)            0.01)

  N Umpqua R.         Umpqua           0.07 (0.02,      -0.02 (-0.12,
                                       0.13)            0.08)

  S Umpqua R.         Umpqua           0.16 (0.1, 0,21) -0.08 (-0.16, 0)

  Coos R.             Mid-South Coast  0.11 (0.07,      -0.09 (-0.17,
                                       0.16)            -0.01)

  Coquille R.         Mid-South Coast  0.14 (0.09,      -0.05 (-0.12,
                                       0.19)            0.03)

  Floras/New R.       Mid-South Coast                   -0.09 (-0.17,
                                                        -0.01)

  Sixes R.            Mid-South Coast  0.06 (0.02,      -0.08 (-0.16,
                                       0.11)            -0.01)
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Harvest

Oregon coast natural (OCN) coho salmon are part of the Oregon Production
Index, and are harvested in ocean fisheries primarily off the coasts of
Oregon and Washington.  Historically they were also harvested in
recreational and commercial troll fisheries from central California to
the west coast of Vancouver Island.  Canadian coho salmon fisheries were
severely restricted in the 1990s to protect upper Fraser River coho, and
have remained so ever since. Ocean fisheries off California were closed
to coho retention in 1993 and have remained closed ever since.  Ocean
fisheries for coho off of Oregon and Washington were dramatically
reduced in 1993 in response to the depressed status of Oregon Coast
natural coho, and ocean fisheries have moved to primarily mark-selective
fishing beginning in 1999.  The consultation standard for management of
ocean fisheries places caps on impact rates that vary with the stock
status and have ranged from 8% to 30%.  Overall exploitation rates
regularly exceeded 60% in the 1980s, but have remained below 20% since
1993 (Figure 119). As discussed above, Caldwell and Cramer (2015) argue
that harvest rates on Oregon coho were over-estimated by OPI during the
1950s and under-estimated by the OPI in the 1980s and 1990s. This does
not affect the low harvest rates beginning in 1993.

![https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/n5XCNR-zr2sZ9b4owbfg-mksA4lHng4OqQD7_isSQOUlQmZFEZZQUUCnUo_80LwowPPfvyZeJR4eIjGQF9A8Qu2X2D9ZSzReXND-UcARydDqqyAvPyiKqwJpIoitQJ68ht05WQ](./media/media/image130.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0in"}

Figure . Total marine and freshwater exploitation rates on Oregon coast
natural coho salmon.  Data from ODFW, PFMC 2020.

### Spatial structure and diversity {#spatial-structure-and-diversity}

Several types of evidence can be used to infer the spatial structure and
diversity of coho salmon in this ESU. Taken together, they all indicate
that current spatial structure and diversity is similar to previous
assessments or improved in some cases (e.g., reduced hatchery
influence). Evidence for spatial structure and diversity is provided by
several criteria in the DSS, as well directly from patterns of spawner
abundance and productivity across the geographic range of the ESU.

 In the DSS, spatial structure and diversity are evaluated at the
population level with assessments of spawner abundance (PD-1), hatchery
influence (PD-2), and spawner (PD-3) and juvenile (PD-4) distributions
within watersheds, all of which have been updated in the DSS (Table 64).
Spatial structure and diversity was also evaluated at the ESU level with
assessments of genetic diversity (ED-1), phenotypic and habitat
diversity (ED-2) and existence of small populations (ED-3); these
criteria were evaluated using professional judgement and have not been
updated since Wainwright et al. (2008).

For PD-1 (sufficient abundance to avoid genetic risks), between the 2012
and 2015 DSS runs population scores either increased (17 populations) or
remained constant (3 populations). Compared to the 2015 run, PD-1 scores
from the 2020 run resulted in 8 populations with increased scores, 9
populations with no change, and 4 populations with decreased scores.
Across all populations, mean scores increased from 0.24 in 2012 to 0.26
in 2015 and remained unchanged (0.26) in 2020. The number of populations
with PD-1 scores exceeding 0.3 (=moderate to high certainty that
populations have sufficient spawners to prevent loss of genetic
variation) increased from 7 populations in the 2012 assessment to 8
populations in both 2015 and 2020 (Table 64).

The DSS criterion for artificial influence (PD-2) assesses the
proportion of naturally-produced fish over two generations or 6 years.
Scores for this factor increase every time the DSS is run in response to
reduced hatchery production in the ESU. Average scores have increased
from 0.55 in 2012 to 0.87 in 2015, to 0.88 in 2020. In the most recent
assessment, only 2 populations (North and South Umpqua) fail to have
either high or complete certainty that hatchery influence does not
adversely affect natural populations (scores \> 0.70). Furthermore,
trends in the proportion of natural spawners (Figure 120) that are not
already at 1.0 are all upwards; these consistently high values are
perhaps the highest of any ESU reviewed here. The State of Oregon made
an unprecedented effort to reduce hatchery influence in wild Oregon
coast coho salmon populations by greatly reducing the production of
hatchery coho salmon along the coast. The result of this action is all
but two independent populations in the entire ESU currently have a 5
year average of \>95% of wild spawners (Table 67). The sole exceptions
are the North and South Umpqua populations. Hatchery production in the
North Umpqua was terminated in the late 1990s and PD-2 scores have
increased from -0.96 in the 2012 run to 0.34 in the most recent run. The
South Umpqua has been at or above 0.50 in previous DDS runs, but scored
-0.04 in the 2020 run due to anomalously high contribution of hatchery
fish in 2016 (Figure 120). 

Scores for the two population-level distribution metrics, PD-3
(spawners) and PD-4 (juveniles), both increased between the 2012 and
2015 assessments, indicating improved dispersal of both adults and
juveniles across the landscape. The scores from the 2020 assessment were
mixed: mean scores for the distribution of spawners decreased while the
score for juveniles continued to increase. Accordingly, spawner
distribution (PD-3) scores were 0.49, 0.65, and 0.56 in 2012, 2015, and
2020, respectively. Juvenile distribution (PD-4) scores were 0.60, 0.69,
and 0.75 in 2012, 2015, and 2020, respectively. The number of
populations with scores of at least 0.3 (moderate to high certainty that
historically occupied watersheds in the population's range had spawners
and juveniles occupying the available habitat) has increased from 14 and
16 populations for spawners and juveniles, respectively, in 2012 to 17
and 19 populations, respectively in 2020 (Table 64).

Population Sustainability (PS) scores, which are based on PP1-1 through
PP-3 and PD-1 through PD-4, were positive for all populations in the
most recent model run (i.e., they had a low-high certainty of being
sustainable), except four populations (Necanicum, Salmon, North Umpqua,
Sixes) that had negative scores. These same four populations had
negative PS scores in the 2015 run, but a fifth population (Floras
Creek) also received a negative PS score in the 2012 run. Like the
trends in PP scores, mean PS scores in 2020 (0.36) were intermediate
between those in 2015 (0.40) and 2012 (0.25) (Lewis 2020).

The spatial structure of coho salmon populations within the ESU can also
be inferred from population-specific spawner abundances (Figure 117) and
productivity (Figure 118). In particular, there is no geographic area or
stratum within the ESU that appears to have considerably lower
abundances or be less productive than other areas or strata and
therefore might serve as a "population sink". Furthermore, if the
factors driving abundances in independent populations apply equally to
dependent populations, then it is unlikely that small populations are
being lost at unusually high rates, which is a concern for spatial
structure (McElhany et al. 2000). Abundance and productivity trends for
dependent populations in the North and Mid Coast strata show the same
patterns and trends as independent populations, consistent with this
premise.  

 

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/I0EoWgZO9WqDBuUjFO5doEf_2yEmPWEsYdeSDob5oWb-KwkxZb8mXGFi8TNVFZrqELcx_mFHS5ugVn9fNNGzQQiQLQkFK15UGByCe_qSf2FonF4YrQQMudPHCfj5HD3uN00RPA](./media/media/image131.png){width="5.833333333333333in"
height="7.552083333333333in"}

Figure . Smoothed trend in the estimated fraction of the natural
spawning population consisting of fish if natural origin.  Points show
the annual raw estimates.  

 

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Population        1995-1999   2000-2004   2005-2009   2010-2014   2015-2019
  ----------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Necanicum R.      0.67        0.95        0.93        0.99        0.99

  Nehalem R.        0.57        0.98        0.96        0.99        0.99

  Tillamook Bay     0.77        0.90        0.98        0.98        1.00

  Nestucca R.       0.88        0.98        0.99        0.98        1.00

  N Coast Dep.      NaN         NaN         1.00        0.99        1.00

  Salmon R.         0.09        0.34        0.37        0.99        0.96

  Siletz R.         0.74        0.89        0.96        1.00        1.00

  Yaquina R.        0.83        0.99        0.97        1.00        0.99

  Alsea R.          0.53        0.96        1.00        1.00        1.00

  Beaver Ck.        0.86        0.96        0.98        1.00        1.00

  Siuslaw R.        0.77        1.00        0.98        0.99        1.00

  Mid-Coast Dep.    NaN         NaN         0.98        0.98        0.99

  Siltcoos Lk.      0.99        0.99        1.00        1.00        1.00

  Tahkenitch Lk.    0.99        1.00        0.99        1.00        1.00

  Tenmile Lk.       1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00        1.00

  Low. Umpqua R.    0.96        0.97        0.93        1.00        1.00

  Middle Umpqua R.  0.95        0.96        0.92        1.00        1.00

  N Umpqua R.       0.30        0.25        0.55        0.91        0.93

  S Umpqua R.       0.77        0.95        0.95        0.96        0.86

  Coos R.           0.99        0.99        0.99        1.00        1.00

  Coquille R.       0.99        0.97        1.00        1.00        1.00

  Floras/New R.     0.89        0.96        0.98        1.00        1.00

  Sixes R.          0.92        0.79        0.93        0.98        1.00
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Biological status relative to recovery goals

The DSS for Oregon Coast coho salmon was specifically developed to
evaluate biological recovery criteria for the entire ESU at two levels,
persistence (EP) and sustainability (ES), which imply different levels
of risk (Wainwright *et al*. 2008).  The persistence analysis evaluates
the ability of the ESU to persist (i.e., not go extinct) over a 100-year
period without artificial support, including the ability to survive
prolonged periods of adverse environmental conditions that may be
expected to occur during a 100 year time frame. It is based on
population productivity, probability of persistence, and abundance
relative to critically low thresholds (Stout *et al*. 2012). 

The sustainability analysis evaluates the ability of the ESU to maintain
its genetic legacy and long-term adaptive potential for the foreseeable
future.  Sustainability implies stability of habitat availability and
other conditions necessary for the full expression of the population's
(or ESU's) life history diversity into the foreseeable future.  Criteria
used to evaluate population sustainability are objective measures of
spawner abundance, artificial influence, spawner and juvenile
distributions, and habitat capacity.  It also includes ESU-level
measures of genetic diversity, phenotypic and habitat diversity, and
small populations.

The most recent overall scores from the DSS (using data through return
year 2019) are intermediate between the two previous assessments for
both ESU Persistence and ESU Sustainability. The most recent ESU
Persistence value is 0.60 (high certainty the ESU is likely to persist),
which is in between the values for 2015 (0.73, high certainty of
persistence) and 2012 (0.44, moderate certainty the ESU is likely to
persist). For ESU sustainability, the current value is 0.24 (low to
moderate certainty the ESU is sustainable), which is also between the
2015 (0.29, moderate certainty) and 2012 (0.23)(low to moderate
certainty the ESU is sustainable).

The decrease in ESU Persistence and Sustainability values and overall
decline in abundance and productivity indicate that OCC were clearly
impacted by unfavorable ocean conditions due to marine heat waves.
However, OCC fared surprisingly well compared to many other ESUs
assessed here, and showed remarkable ability to avoid the extremely low
abundances and marine survival rates observed in the late 1990s during
the previous extended down turn.

#### Federal Recovery Plan

The final Federal recovery plan for Oregon Coast coho salmon was
released in December 2016 (NMFS 2016). The overriding theme of the plan
is "*to protect and restore the freshwater and estuarine rearing
habitats that support juvenile survival and overall productivity*" so
that the ESU is sustainable and persistent and no longer needs federal
protection under the ESA. The Plan states that the federal government
will remove Oregon Coast coho salmon from ESA listing when it determines
that:

> 1\) the species has achieved a biological status consistent with
> recovery ─ the best available information indicates it has sufficient
> abundance, population growth rate, population spatial structure, and
> diversity to meet its biological recovery goal, and,
>
> 2\) factors that led to ESA listing have been reduced or eliminated to
> the point where federal protection under the ESA is no longer needed,
> and there is reasonable certainty that the relevant regulatory
> mechanisms are adequate to protect Oregon Coast coho salmon
> sustainability.

The biological status of the ESU is evaluated by the DSS (described
previously), and must meet two criteria: 1) most of the independent
populations have to be sustainable in each stratum, and 2) all five
strata have to be sustainable for the whole ESU to be sustainable.  The
DSS elements considered in this assessment include spawner abundance
(PD-1), spawner distribution (PD-3), juvenile distribution (PD-4),
critical abundance (PP-3), population productivity (PP-1), and
artificial influence (PD-2). In the 2020 run of the DSS, the majority of
populations within each stratum had moderate to high certainty the
population was sustainable (i.e., PS \> 0.30; Table 64). At the Stratum
level, Stratum Sustainability (SS) scores show that all strata had
positive scores (low to high certainty the Stratum is sustainable),
three strata (Mid Coast, Lakes, Mid-South Coast) had high certainty the
strata was sustainable, one (N Coast) had moderate certainty it was
sustainable, and only one stratum (Umpqua) had low to moderate certainty
it was sustainable (Table 64). The current DSS scores (described above,
Lewis 2020) shows that there is low to moderate certainty the ESU is
sustainable. 

#### Oregon Recovery Plan

The State of Oregon developed an Oregon Coast Coho Conservation Plan
(OCCCP) in 2007 to "*ensure the continued viability of the Oregon Coast
Coho Evolutionary Significant Unit (ESU) and to achieve a desired status
that provides substantial ecological and societal benefits*" (ODFW
2007), p. 3). The plan relies on a combination of existing regulatory
programs plus effective long-term participation in non-regulatory
conservation work to achieve desired status. The OCCCP defines the
desired status for the ESU, which is evaluated using six measurable
criteria that pertain to population abundance, persistence,
productivity, distribution, diversity, and habitat. The goal of the
Conservation Plan will be met when: 1) all independent populations pass
the six measurable criteria for independent populations and 2) the
aggregate of dependent populations within a biogeographic stratum pass
the two measurable criteria for dependent populations.

The plan recognizes that positive improvement may occur before full
desired status is achieved. Therefore, the plan defines a minimum level
of desired status as, "All 21 independent populations pass all the
sustainability criteria (as defined by the Oregon/Northern California
Coast TRT). A pass is defined as any positive truth value for the
individual criteria, a fail is a truth value ≤ 0.0. Populations that
currently pass (as defined in the previous sentence) must maintain or
improve upon their current scores" (ODFW 2007, Appendix II p. 2). The
latest iteration of the DSS (using data through return year 2019)
indicates that four independent populations do not meet this criterion
(Population Sustainability \< 0.0) (Lewis 2020). These populations are
the Necanicum, Salmon, North Umpqua, and Sixes River; these same four
populations were the only populations to have PS scores below 0.0 in the
previous run of the DSS using comparable data (Lewis 2020).

It should be noted, however, that three of these populations are
unlikely to have PS scores greater than 0.0 unless the Population
Viability Assessments (PVA; the criteria for PP-2) are updated and the
outcomes improve substantially. The original PP-2 scores for the
Necanicum, Salmon, and Sixes populations were -0.44, -1.0, and -1.0,
respectively, when the DSS was originally run (Wainwright et al. 2008),
which prevent these populations from attaining sustainability scores
[\>]{.underline} 0.0 regardless of improvements for other DSS metrics. A
new PVA assessment using a single model and shorter time periods
(1990-2019 or 1999-2019) indicate that the risk of extinction for these
populations are substantially improved (ODFW 2021), suggesting that
updating PP-2 criteria with the full suite of models may result in
improved PP-2 scores.

The conclusions of the draft 12 year assessment of the Oregon Coast Coho
Conservation Plan (ODFW 2021) are favorable but more work is needed to
improve freshwater productivity to reach broad-sense recovery goals.
Specifically, the conclusions state that:

> "After record low spawner abundances in the 1990s, the biological
> performance of the OC Coho ESU has continued to improve. Low ocean
> survival in the late 1990s was effectively the end of a period of low
> realized ocean survival (i.e., including high rates of harvest) that
> lasted at least a quarter century. Substantial reductions in harvest,
> coupled with improved conditions for ocean survival, have resulted in
> recent returns that include some of the highest in decades, and
> updated population viability modeling indicates that most populations
> have low risks of extinction over the next 100 years and substantial
> improvements in populations at most risk (i.e., Salmon; Sixes).
> Updated metrics for the DSS have also remained generally favorable for
> the ESU and most Independent Populations despite challenging
> conditions for both freshwater and ocean survival over the past
> several years."
>
> "A predominant role of ocean survival in recent increases in abundance
> does not imply an insignificant role of density dependent freshwater
> mortality in the regulation of OC Coho spawner abundance. Continued
> improvements in freshwater productivity through habitat protection,
> restoration, and management will be necessary to consistently achieve
> the OCCCP's measureable criteria and to provide substantial ecological
> and societal benefits. Aside from harvest management, few actions are
> available to directly address fluctuations in ocean survival. However,
> continued efforts to address freshwater limiting factors will enhance
> resiliency of OC coho populations under fluctuating ocean conditions
> and a changing climate." (ODFW 2021, p.83).

### Updated biological risk summary

As stated above, the draft 12 year assessment of the Oregon Coast Coho
Conservation Plan (Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife 2021)
highlights favorable improvements for OC Coho overall, consistent with
our assessment. It also notes the strong role that ocean condition play
on adult returns to the ESU, including recent low abundances associated
with strong marine heat waves (see Environmental Conditions chapter).
The assessment also highlights the need for continued improvements to
freshwater productivity to achieve broad sense desired status,
especially given the expected challenges posed by climate and ocean
change.

The latest ESU scores for persistence (high certainty of ESU
persistence) and sustainability (low to moderate certainty of ESU
sustainability) also demonstrate the biological status of the ESU has
decreased slightly since the 2015 review (high certainty of persistence,
moderate certainty of sustainability), which covered a period of
favorable ocean conditions and high marine survival rates. However,
current ESU scores have improved relative to the 2012 assessment
(moderate certainty of persistence, low to moderate certainty of
sustainability). This improvement occurred despite similar or better
abundances and marine survival rates during the earlier period,
suggesting continued benefits due to management decisions to reduce both
harvest and hatchery releases.

Despite these somewhat optimistic results for OC coho, however, it is
unclear what the future will bring. A recent assessment of the
vulnerability of ESA-listed salmonid "species" to climate change
indicated that OC coho had high overall vulnerability, had high
biological sensitivity and climate exposure, but only moderate adaptive
capacity (Crozier *et al.* 2019b). Because young coho spend a full year
in freshwater before ocean entry, the juvenile freshwater stage was
considered to be highly vulnerable. They also scored high in sensitivity
at the marine stage due to expected changes due to ocean acidification.
These results are consistent with the climate change assessment by
Wainwright and Weitkamp (2013), which indicated OC coho will likely be
negatively affected by climate change at all stages of the life cycle.

# Recent trends in marine and terrestrial environments and their likely influence on Pacific salmon in the Pacific Northwest

### Introduction

The current status of listed Pacific salmon populations is influenced by
numerous factors, including human activities (e.g., fishing mortality,
habitat restoration and degradation, hatchery production), and variation
in environmental conditions in both freshwater and marine environments. 
The increasing trends in natural spawners seen for some DPS at least
partially reflect favorable environmental conditions in marine waters of
the northern California Current and in freshwater habitats in recent
years.  It is well established that ocean conditions during the first
weeks or months of marine life have a large influence on overall marine
survival for salmon (Pearcy 1992; Pearcy & McKinnell 2007). 
Accordingly, a large portion of the short-term variation in population
productivity may be due to ocean conditions, which fluctuate at short
time scales.  For example, marine survival can vary by over an order of
magnitude between years (Lindley *et al.* 2009).

Relatively productive conditions resulted in high freshwater and marine
survival rates and subsequent high adult returns for many salmon stocks
throughout the Pacific Northwest at various times, especially in the
early 2010s.  However, changes in ocean and freshwater conditions
beginning in early 2014 due to exceptionally warm ocean waters and
associated terrestrial impacts, plus a strengthening El Niño event led
to subsequent declines in abundance in many DPS.

This chapter summarizes what is known about marine and terrestrial
conditions to provide environmental context when examining the viability
assessments included in this report. Of primary interest are the recent
climatic conditions that have existed over the past 15-20 years, three
to four generations of the Pacific salmonids that are being considered
in these assessments.

### OBSERVED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

#### Precipitation and surface air temperature

A strong and persistent warming trend and large year-to-year variations
in precipitation are among the most notable features of western US
climate in recent decades (Figure 121). For the Pacific Northwest, water
year 2015 stands out as the warmest year on record.

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/rPsweLxHZnTQ9NMUhDAN6BmcVP4Usq3DDe38cFOjy5kHsQuGRp5_XuMEU9k7bRiWbKXUydhYmWRFh-U_y8Ga7fTpJc6dx7cNCLeaHDrnlVmgL6OCHbnvnzUG1OyE-SN1brriIeM](./media/media/image132.png){width="5.2781955380577426in"
height="5.147916666666666in"}![https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/ncrH_5WKQCksq2hwOV7hT-HM2IaugbjgsUsrAnCIVPOLvBk5PK2622cFIP51CB7JDmLHSX58rugzq39jQM4VZPAIZD7qE3ICDVhYAYOxBej7e8Bg6PpGAZpBgKfzBWXsct_iz9g](./media/media/image133.png){width="5.518797025371828in"
height="5.375075459317586in"}

Figure . Water year (October-September) surface air temperature (top
panel) and precipitation (bottom panel) for the Pacific Northwest
(OR-WA-ID combined). In each panel the historical average for 1981-2010
is shown with the black horizontal line. These figures show US Climate
Division Data and were created at
<https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag/regional/time-series>.

#### Stream Flow

![https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/C_ra-JBhdqHrZIEerZJCQ4O3086iHhN57KcEX5CnOtm8-S9APIbcNXCgOjKflIUM73iKHVnjGW8hq0ZFzEgMYLB5ebtaXbB-s3Z4MjHQqYc4F4iwD0naQhnA5Rvbxggldg0Q1ok](./media/media/image134.png){width="5.551082677165354in"
height="2.4511275153105863in"}                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Figure 122. Water year streamflow anomalies (normalized with respect to
the 1981-2010 mean and standard deviation) for the Columbia River at the
Dalles. Data for this figure were downloaded from the USGS
(waterdata.usgs.gov). 

A broad-brush overview of water year streamflow variations in western
states is provided in Figure 122, where stream gage data indicate
substantially more low-flow than high-flow years from 2000-2019.
Columbia Basin streamflows were below average from 2001-05, 2007-10, and
2015-16, and much above average in water years 2011-12 and 2017-18. 

#### Last five years \-- annual anomalies from recent past

Thus over the past century temperatures have risen steadily, while
precipitation remains highly variable. Warmer temperatures intensify the
hydrological cycle within the atmosphere, causing more intense storm
events (Warner *et al.* 2015). Within snow-dominated watersheds, warmer
winters and springs reduce snow accumulation and hasten snowmelt.
Reduced snowpack causes an earlier and smaller freshet in spring. 
Reduced snowpack also can lead to lower minimum flows and higher stream
temperatures in summer (USGCRP 2018). Projections of climate change in
the western U.S. (USGCRP 2018) indicate that both of these trends are
likely to continue. Summer precipitation is projected to decline,
exacerbating low flows and high stream temperatures in the western U.S.

Winter conditions affect most salmon (i.e., all populations other than
steelhead and winter-run Chinook salmon) during the egg and early
rearing stages, which may be disturbed and relocated during flood
events. Migrating smolts typically benefit from higher flows (Faulkner
*et al.* 2018; Notch *et al.* 2020), although the impacts on migrating
adults varies across populations.  Summer conditions affect juveniles
rearing in streams (especially coho, steelhead and yearling Chinook),
and adults migrating, holding or spawning over the summer (many Chinook
runs, Columbia and Snake River sockeye and summer-run steelhead). 

A recent assessment of exposure to climate change across the west coast
region (Crozier *et al.* 2019b) found that by the 2040s, average stream
temperatures are likely to increase by over 2 standard deviations across
most of the region, and either flooding (southern domains) or loss of
snowmelt (northern domains) was also very likely to change dramatically
in most ESUs. Here we put these projected changes within the context of
recent conditions (2015-2019) by expressing four metrics (summer stream
temperature, low flow, high flow, and snowpack) in terms of standard
deviations from the recent historical mean (1998-2014). Although they
are currently anomalous years, they are likely to represent average
conditions in the near future.

To facilitate interpretation of salmon dynamics within individual ESUs,
Harvey et al. (2018) averaged environmental conditions across many
measurement stations within each of six ecoregions in the west coast
domain from the interior Columbia River Basin to the Washington coast to
southern California (Figure 123). We have re-analysed these results to
consider the last five years (2015-2019) specifically in relation to the
mean and standard deviation of the previous 15 years (1998-2014).
Deviations for each year (Yt) were calculated from the raw value (Xt) as
Yt=(Xt-Xmu)/Xsd for each region, where Xmu and Xsd were the mean and
standard deviation, respectively, over the 1998-2014 period.

 ![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/WV-9DftL4umYZePW4BFq2Kb3F-\_6RwxLxC-uDKX94DWrLDa0dFTPGNGeRgj2kJ-PZJAm9q-5wjUd4_Tu2I0oB\_-fGVrbSNftb4o_r1KA6yhemMPGuy6gMjNBebqeMH_hSVZQs60](./media/media/image135.png){width="6.5in"
height="6.5in"}![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/57wT9-Q6iwDylxdsqA4GVNCR4vo7QZEa9pqT6eAaN6iIVvcAxAZlFn3LzjsM92rs_nmRcAHzAzsP4AncQum4d1urGOj8ejkEDXcwrnVloShg0-tNyjCOyqwWq2HrR9-JRi6JN5I](./media/media/image136.jpeg){width="4.493055555555555in"
height="7.291666666666667in"}

Figure . a) Deviations from the 1998-2014 baseline period in selected
ecoregions in the maximum 1-day flow event per year (MaxFlow), the
minimum 7-day flow event per year (MinFlow), snowpack on April 1, and
mean August stream temperature. b) Map of freshwater ecoregions within
which conditions were averaged. Courtesy of Harvey et al. 2019.

 

In 2015, the combination of below-average precipitation and record-high
surface air temperature brought record-low springtime snowpack to much
of the west, leading to what has been called "the western snow drought."
The diminished snow pack and high surface temperatures combined with low
springtime precipitation yielded especially low runoff to western
watersheds in spring and early summer 2015. Temperatures returned to
near normal in much of Washington and Idaho in August (which is the
month shown in Figure 123), but then spiked again in the fall of 2015.
Unusually low flows and warm stream temperatures in spring/summer 2015
caused widespread problems for salmon throughout the western U.S. 

In 2016, minimum flows continued to show long-term drought effects,
especially in California and the unglaciated portion of the Columbia,
but other indices were transitioning to more favorable high flows of
2017 in most regions. 

Two ecoregions stood out in showing strongly anomalous conditions in all
five years: summer temperatures were above average (\>1SD) in the Salish
Sea & Washington Coast region, and minimum flows were below average
(\>1SD) in southern California throughout the period of this status
review. 

Particularly notable climate impacts on salmon occurred during the 2015
heat wave in the Pacific Northwest. Using life cycle models of coho
salmon in coastal streams in Washington, Ohlberger et al. (2018) found
that juvenile production has been limited historically by low-flow
periods. In their projections of coho production under future flow
scenarios, negative population impacts followed reductions in the mean
and increasing variability in annual summer low flows. Other studies
(e.g., Larsen & Woelfle-Erskine 2018) found that juvenile coho
preferentially select pools with more groundwater intrusion, which
stabilizes streams during low-flow periods. Thus, drawdown of coastal
aquifers would directly affect potential habitat for these endangered
salmon.

In summer 2015, the Columbia River exhibited record temperatures (23°C
in the forebay of Bonneville Dam, and 27.5°C in the McNary Dam fish
ladder) that affected summer-run salmon populations, especially sockeye
and later-migrating components of the spring/summer Chinook run. Only 9%
of Snake River sockeye salmon that were detected at Bonneville Dam with
passive integrated transponder tags survived the first stretch of their
migration, and were detected at McNary Dam (Figure 124). The individuals
that survived were those who happened to miss the hottest days in the
river (Crozier *et al.* 2020). Similar high sockeye prespawning
mortality due to elevated river temperatures (\>19\'C) was also observed
in the Fraser River basin (MacDonald *et al.* 2019).

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/EU0j0XIKddlJ3UZj5vXPBgnR5KfE0K8RFpHb52NTC_Nfe_rOK-md6-Bn3mP9_IVwyrYm2KdClbJosSwvBRSP-KPN5T68_yMsli2Bmu_0PbhVAtkyabj0QVs1okaLkeRnVHuauk0](./media/media/image137.png){width="4.819548337707786in"
height="3.6068875765529307in"}

Figure . Apparent survival of Snake River sockeye salmon from Bonneville
to McNary Dam as a function of the temperature experienced on the day of
passage at Bonneville Dam. Survival was assessed using pit-tag
detections at or upstream of McNary Dam. Courtesy of Crozier et al 2018
(Fig 7): Passage and Survival of Adult Snake River Sockeye Salmon within
and Upstream from the Federal Columbia River Power System from
2008-2017.

Most of the spring/summer Chinook run reached cooler upriver tributaries
before the worst of the heat wave, but mainstem survival of
later-migrating populations, such as the Pahsimeroi and South Fork
Salmon River, was only 61%, which is the lowest observed (since 2004).
Snake River fall Chinook hit record high temperatures later in the year
and data from PIT-tagged fish showed that they also exhibited their
lowest average apparent survival from Bonneville to Ice Harbor Dam
(65%). Interestingly, summer-run steelhead migrate during peak summer
temperatures, but they have adapted to move into cool tributaries when
temperatures in the mainstem become stressful, and they did not show
increased mortality between Bonneville and McNary Dams in 2015 ((Crozier
*et al.* 2020), Siegel and Crozier in prep). 

#### Ocean Conditions

Surface temperatures in the northeast Pacific Ocean were notably cooler
than average from 1999-2002 and again from 2006-summer 2013, warmer than
normal from 2003-2005, and at record high temperatures for much of the
period from fall 2013-2019 (Figure 125). 

For the California Current region, surface temperatures reached record
high levels from 2014-2016, with 2015 being the single warmest year in
the historical record (Jacox *et al.* 2018). The extreme ocean
temperatures for the northeast Pacific and California Current were
associated with a small number of persistent wind and weather patterns,
some of which have been related to climate conditions in the tropical
Pacific (Di Lorenzo & Mantua 2016; Jacox *et al.* 2018).

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/\_PGtA7tCKAJG06qTtEBEeTCDPKJFuf5mNAVtkjeLkCRq6OSCc3UUSy3eIM6vb8OksBEH4TamUuhpu3udd-\_kFAAbhYy5LXXDuFzG7wQAW6u9okhbawvGxx1UqpkwGF4wnjvI_uY](./media/media/image138.png){width="6.5in"
height="2.625in"}

Figure . Monthly average sea surface temperature anomaly time series (in
Degrees C) for the NE Pacific Arc pattern defined by Johnstone and
Mantua (2014). 

#### Biological response to marine conditions since 2014

A number of reports provide overviews of recent physical and biological
conditions in regions of the NE Pacific Ocean that West Coast Pacific
salmon may occupy during their marine residence period:

-   CalCOFI's State of the California Current (Thompson 2019), 

-   the Integrated Ecosystem Assessment's California Current Ecosystem
    Status Report (Harvey *et al.* 2020), 

-   Fisheries and Oceans Canada's State of the Physical, Biological and
    Selected Fishery Resources of Pacific Canadian Marine Ecosystems
    (Boldt *et al.* 2019), and

-   Alaska Fisheries Science Center's Ecosystem Status Reports for the
    Gulf of Alaska (Zador *et al.* 2019), Eastern Bering Sea (Siddon and
    Zador 2019), and Aleutian Islands (Zador & Ortiz 2018). 

-   Southwest Fisheries Science Center Coastal Pelagic Survey reports
    (Stierhoff *et al.* 2020) 

In all cases, the reports show a dramatic biological response at all
trophic levels---from primary producers to marine mammals and sea
birds\--to the marine heat waves that have spread across the Northeast
Pacific Ocean since 2014 and continue into 2020 (and perhaps beyond). 
These ecosystem changes have had large effects (both positive and
negative) on Pacific salmon returns around the Pacific Rim, not just
listed species on the West Coast.  How each listed salmon population was
impacted by recent anomalous conditions described in this chapter is
beyond the scope of this report and would include many blank sections.
This is because each population enters the ocean at different times,
locations, and at different sizes (e.g., as subyearling or yearling
smolts) even for populations originating within a single river basin
(Weitkamp *et al.* 2015). Where fish from each population go while in
the ocean also varies by run timing, natal origin, and species (Beamish
2018); some populations move rapidly offshore (e.g., steelhead), others
move northwards along the continental shelf (e.g., Columbia River spring
Chinook, sockeye, chum, some coho), while still other populations remain
in local waters (many fall Chinook, non-Columbia spring Chinook, some
coho). Furthermore, while we have a general understanding of where
salmon are during their first and last summers in marine waters, where
they go during the one to several years in between is poorly understood.
Taken together, this huge variation in salmon marine ecology results in
each population being subjected to a unique and poorly documented suite
of experiences while in the marine environment, which determines when,
where, and how mortality occurs. This poor understanding is especially
true for listed populations because they are like needles in a
proverbial haystack. Finding more than one or two individuals from
listed populations during their ocean residency\--let alone having
enough for robust statistical analyses\--is nearly impossible.
Consequently, the following section highlights how unusual the entire
ecosystem has been\--from the lowest to highest trophic levels including
large salmon populations \--to provide a flavor of the likely impacts
that listed populations experienced while in marine waters during recent
years. Here, we provide brief summaries of the biological trends
described by these reports and a few other sources, with an emphasis on
findings that are pertinent to salmon survival.  Unless noted, the
information comes from the above report series.

Overall, the marine heat wave in 2014-2016 had the most drastic impact
on marine ecosystems in 2015, with lingering effects into 2016 and
2017.  Conditions had somewhat returned to "normal" in 2018, but another
marine heat wave in 2019 again set off a series of marine ecosystem
changes across the North Pacific.  One reason for lingering effects of
ecosystem response is due to biological lags.  These lags result from
species impacts at larval or juvenile stages, which are typically most
sensitive to extreme temperatures or changes in food supply.  It is only
once these species grow to adult size or recruit into fisheries that the
impact of the heat wave is apparent.  For example, most marine mortality
for juvenile salmon is thought to occur in the first weeks or months of
ocean residence.  However, whether marine survival was exceptionally
high or low is not known until salmon return as adults, 1-5 years after
ocean entry. Biological lags also impact upper trophic levels, such as
whales and seabirds, which can take longer to recover from adult
mortality and poor body condition.

#### Primary production

Perhaps the most dramatic change to primary producers was the largest
bloom of the diatom Pseudo-nitzschia ever recorded in 2015 (McCabe *et
al.* 2016; Bates *et al.* 2018).  It stretched from southern California
to the Aleutian Islands in Alaska, had some of the highest
concentrations of cells ever recorded, and was particularly long
lasting.  Pseudo-nitzschia can produce domoic acid, a neurotoxin that
causes amnesic shellfish poisoning, which is potentially fatal in
mammals (including humans) and seabirds.  In marine food webs, filter
feeding molluscs (primarily bivalves) and planktivorous fishes such as
Pacific sardine and Northern anchovy, consume Pseudo-nitzschia, and
species that consume contaminated shellfish and fish become sick or die
(McCabe *et al.* 2016; Bates *et al.* 2018).  

The 2015 bloom caused high domoic acid levels in many commercially and
recreationally important species, including razor clams, mussels and
other bivalves, anchovy and sardines, and benthic scavengers Dungeness
and red rock crab.  Trophic transfer of domoic acid to higher trophic
levels caused the stranding or death of hundreds of seabirds and marine
mammals in 2015 and early 2016, and likely contributed to the large
whale unusual mortality event in the Gulf of Alaska in 2015 (Bates *et
al.* 2018).  

While subsequent Pseudo-nitzschia blooms have not been as extensive as
the 2015 bloom, they have continued to cause delays, closures, and
restrictions for both razor clam and Dungeness crab fisheries in
California, Oregon and Washington.  Southern Oregon/northern California
is particularly prone to elevated domoic acid levels in clams and crabs
that exceed permissible levels for human health (20mg/kg tissue).

Other notable primary-producer related events include harmful algal
bloom of Noctilua and Heterosigma in the Salish Sea (the Strait of
Georgia and Puget Sound) in 2018 after a three year absence.  There were
also more harmful algal blooms in 2018 than the previous 3 years in the
Strait of Georgia.  In the Gulf of Alaska, phytoplankton blooms were
earlier and in higher concentrations in 2017-18 relative to warm years
of 2014-2016. Surface nutrient concentrations were some of the lowest on
record in 2019 across the Gulf of Alaska, which, paired with elevated
water temperatures, affected the offshore phytoplankton community,
oceanic food webs, as well as oxygen levels and biogeochemistry.  

#### Lower trophic levels: copepods, krill, jellyfish, and pyrosomes

Throughout most of the NE Pacific Ocean, the marine heat waves had
profound effects on the animals at the base of the food web.  Summer
copepod communities are normally dominated by cold water (=lipid rich)
species, but during the heat waves northern species were largely or
completely absent and warm water (lipid poor) species dominated.  Not
only were southern species abundant, but novel communities were observed
in many areas.  On the Newport Hydrographic Line (44.6° N), for example,
14 species of copepods that had never been observed were documented,
which originated both offshore and from southern waters (Peterson *et
al.* 2017). Other changes on the Newport line during the initial heat
wave included reduced biomass of copepods and krill, and high abundances
of gelatinous organisms such as larvaceans and doliolids (both types of
pelagic tunicates).  Similar abrupt changes in copepods, krill and
gelatinous organisms were observed from southern California to the Gulf
of Alaska. 

To characterize this shift in biomass between major functional groups,
Galbraith and Young (2019) developed a "crunchy" versus "squishy" index.
The index is the ratio of crunchy (zooplankton with hard chitinous
exoskeleton with high protein and lipid) to squishy (zooplankton with
hydrostatic skeleton, mainly gelatinous animals with high water content
and low nutritional value) biomass. They show a very high squishy
biomass in most areas of British Columbia in 2014-2019, which peaked in
most areas in 2015. Furthermore, Galbraith and Young (2019) expect that
years with high squishy index equates to poor survival for juvenile fish
and seabirds, which have higher survival when prey quality is high
(i.e., crunchier).

The marine heat wave also negatively affected krill growth rates,
abundance, and species composition from California to central Alaska. 
For example, krill were absent from the Steward (Alaska) line during
2014-2017 but high in early fall of 2018.  Krill length, used to
indicate growth, was poor in 2014-2016 but increased in 2018 on the
Trinidad Head line (41.1° N) in northern California.  Morgan et al.
(2019) cautioned that the perceived absence of krill in some areas
(Brodeur *et al.* 2019) was due to changes in depth distribution, rather
than absence, because early larval stages were present. In general, most
copepod and krill communities had returned to more "normal" conditions
in 2018.  

Jellyfish communities also exhibited dramatic changes from California to
Alaska.  In the California Current, Pacific sea nettle (*Chrysaora
fuscescens*) is the dominant species near shore.  However, starting in
2015, there was a dramatic drop in the abundance of sea nettles and
concurrent increase in water jellyfish (*Aequorea* spp.) and egg-yolk
jellyfish (*Phacellophora camtschatica*) (Morgan *et al.* 2019).  These
changes to the jellyfish community continued until 2017.  In 2019 the
Gulf of Alaska, Zador et al. (2019) reported the highest-ever catches of
Northern sea nettle (*Chrysaora melanaster*) in bottom trawls.  This
species was also extremely abundant in surface trawls in winter 2019 as
far south as 52° N, 100s of km from shore (Pakhomov *et al.* 2019).  

Finally, 2017 should be considered the Year of the Pyrosome in the NE
Pacific, because of the enormous biomass of the pelagic colonial
tunicate, *Pyrosoma atlanticum*, present throughout the region (Brodeur
*et al.* 2018; Miller *et al.* 2019). Pyrosomes are common in warm open
ocean waters throughout the tropics, but are rare north of southern
California.  Pyrosomes showed a clear increase in abundance from south
to north during 2013-2018 within the California Current system. At the
peak of their distribution in 2017, they were everywhere in truly
staggering quantities: from southern California to northern Gulf of
Alaska at densities of up to 200,000 kg/km\^3. By 2019 pyrosomes were
effectively absent in waters from Oregon northwards, although they were
still present in California.  

The ecosystem effects of the pyrosome explosion are unknown but are
expected to be large due to their staggering biomass and widespread
distribution (Miller *et al.* 2019).  Pyrosomes have low nutrient
content, making them a low quality, high fiber prey. Despite this, they
were observed in the diets of dozens of species from sea urchins and
other demersal invertebrates to rockfishes and other commercial fishes,
juvenile and adult Pacific salmon to fin whales (Brodeur *et al.*
2018). 

#### Forage fish and squid

Like lower trophic levels, the abundance and species composition of
forage fish and squid have been highly variable since 2014.  One species
that has apparently expanded its range and abundance is the California
market squid, *Doryteuthis opalescens*.  Throughout the California
Current, squid have been increasing in abundance to the point that
substantial commercial fisheries for California market squid have been
occurring in Washington and Oregon waters since 2016, reaching the
highest commercial catches ever recorded in Oregon in 2020 (\>7 million
tons).  Squid catches have also steadily increased during juvenile
salmon surveys off the Washington/Oregon coast (Morgan *et al.* 2019).

Other species that have increased in recent years in the California
Current include Pacific pompano (*Peprilus simillimus*), adult anchovy
(*Engraulis mordax*), some species of lanternfishes (Myctophidae), and
both jack (*Trachurus symmetricus*) and Pacific mackerel (*Scomber
japonicus*), with sardine and anchovy increases especially prominent in
central and southern areas. Species with marked declines include hake
(*Merluccius productus*), juvenile sardine and anchovy, Pacific herring
(*Clupea pallasii*), and juvenile salmon (especially in 2017 in the
northern California Current). Juvenile rockfish have been extremely
abundant in the northern California Current and as far north as British
Columbia in 2016-2018 (Chandler *et al.* 2017; Boldt *et al.* 2019;
Morgan *et al.* 2019).

The increase in northern anchovy has been particularly strong in central
and southern California, where it serves as high quality prey for many
species. Adult anchovy were high in 2018 and the highest ever in 2019 in
central California and larval anchovies were also the highest in the
CalCOFI time series in 2019.  While breeding murres and Rhinoceros
auklets were apparently unable to take advantage of plentiful anchovy,
California sea lions on the Channel Islands did, resulting in very high
counts, weights and growth rates of California sea lion pups in 2018. 
Humpback whales were also observed congregating near shore along central
California in 2013-2019 while feeding on anchovy schools.  High
consumption of anchovy by maturing Pacific salmon has been associated
with thiamine deficiencies, which negatively impacts the survival of
offspring (N. Mantua, SWFSC, unpubl. data).

One of the more impressive increases in abundance has been anadromous
American shad (*Alosa sapidissima*), an exotic species that was
introduced to the West Coast in the 1800s.  Counts of shad over
Bonneville Dam, the lowest mainstem dam on the Columbia River, reached
6.0 million fish in 2018, the highest ever, but were even higher in 2019
(7.4 million fish).  Shad counts in 2020 at Bonneville declined slightly
to 6.2 million fish. 

Farther north, the biomass of Pacific herring increased in the Strait of
Georgia from approximately 2010-2018, with mixed trends in other parts
of British Columbia.  Northern anchovy have been abundant in the Salish
Sea (collectively the Strait of Georgia and Puget Sound) since 2016,
consistent with increased abundances in years following elevated coastal
temperatures (Duguid *et al.* 2019).  Eulachon (*Thaleichthys
pacificus*), which have been declining throughout their range, increased
in abundance in the Strait of Georgia in both 2015 and 2018, and in the
Columbia River in 2014. Juvenile salmon of all species except chum
salmon have also been below average off the west coast of Vancouver
Island, while chum salmon have been abundant.  The catch of juvenile
salmon in 2017 in two widely-separated surveys targeting juvenile salmon
were the lowest in their respective time series.  Catches in Icy Strait
(Alaska), which normally consists of juvenile pink, chum and sockeye
salmon, and off the Washington/Oregon (spring Chinook and coho salmon)
were both extremely low.  These surveys are used to forecast adult
returns and predicted poor returns in future years, some of which have
transpired (e.g., the extremely low Columbia River spring Chinook return
in 2019).

In Alaskan waters, capelin (*Mallotus villosus*) and sand lance
(*Ammodytes personatus*) appear to have declined because they have been
low or absent in sea bird diets that normally contain them since 2014
and 2015, respectively.  Capelin also had decreased abundances in
acoustic surveys. By contrast, Pacific herring in the eastern Gulf of
Alaska and eastern Bering Sea were above long term means in recent
years.  

#### Salmon survival/returns

The abundance of Pacific salmon populations from California to Alaska,
like other guilds or trophic levels described in this section, have
shown dramatic changes in abundance since 2015. While some populations
(especially in northern areas) have returned at record highs abundances,
others have dropped to new lows. The following summary of recent North
American Pacific salmon returns provides context for listed salmon
populations reviewed in the previous chapters. Specifically, it
demonstrates that unusually high or low returns are not restricted to
any one region, species, or production type (hatchery or wild), but were
continent wide. For example, recent low steelhead returns to the
Columbia River basin parallel extremely low steelhead returns to the
Fraser River basin. In many cases trends of listed species mirror those
of hatchery or mixed (hatchery + wild) populations, indicating the
critical role that recent unusual environmental conditions have had on
North American Pacific salmon. Unless noted, these abundances come from
PFMC 2020 (pfmc.org), the Pacific Salmon Commission website (PSC.org),
Columbia DART website (cbr.washington.edu), and the Alaska Department of
Fish and Game website (www.adfg.alaska.gov).    

The abundance of southern Chinook salmon stocks (Sacramento, Klamath,
Rogue Rivers) have all been at very low levels in at least some years
since 2014 to the point several stocks have been declared "overfished"
under management regulations.  Sacramento fall Chinook salmon have seen
large swings in escapement (hatchery + natural), from a high of 406,000
in 2013, steadily declining to 90,000 in 2016 and reaching a low of
43,000 in 2017 (Figure 126). Escapement in 2018 increased to 102,000 and
increased again with the 2019 return to 162,000 fish.  Total run size of
Klamath River Chinook salmon shows a slightly different pattern, with
high in river run size in 2012 (295,000), which declined to 24,000 in
2016, rebounded to 91,000 in 2018, but declined again to 37,000 in
2019.  Indices for south migrating Oregon coast Chinook salmon (Gold Ray
Dam \[Rogue River\] and Winchester Dam \[Umpqua River\] counts) also
show a steady decline from 2015 to 2019. Peak spawner indices for north
migrating Oregon coast Chinook salmon were highest in 2015 (247
adults/mile) and steadily declined to 2019 (64 adults/mile).  

Chinook salmon in the Columbia River have generally been declining since
2015, with details dependent on the year and run (Figure 126).  For
example, the minimum return of spring Chinook to the Columbia basin has
steadily declined from 2015 (420,000) to 2019 (110,000), one of the
lowest levels since the 1990s.  Run size for Columbia River summer
Chinook salmon has also seen a steady decline from a minimum run size of
127,000 fish in 2015 to 35,000 in 2019.  The minimum run size for
Columbia fall Chinook exceeded 1 million fish during 2013-2015 and
dropped to 275,000 in 2018 (the lowest since 2007) and rebounded
slightly to 256,000 in 2019.

![](./media/media/image139.png){width="6.916666666666667in"
height="2.6663582677165354in"}

Figure . Total escapement of adult fall Sacramento Chinook, total
inriver run size of Klamath fall Chinook, and counts of natural fall
Chinook at Huntley Park (Rogue River) (left), and total in river run
size for Columbia River spring, summer and fall Chinook (right) during
2000-2019. Data from (Council 2020).

In Oregon, Washington, and southern British Columbia, several species
show consistent patterns, suggesting a common marine cause.  For
example, coho salmon returns were extremely low in 2015 from the Oregon
coast to the Salish Sea, some of the lowest levels on record.  The small
body size of many of these adults suggested poor feeding conditions
during the last summer in marine waters.  Steelhead returns were
extremely low in 2017 and 2018 in the same areas, to the point that
Thompson and Chilcotin River (Fraser River, British Columbia) steelhead
were petitioned for emergency protection under the Canadian Species At
Risk Act (Neilson and Taylor 2018). One species in the region that
increased in abundances were chum salmon starting in 2016, perhaps in
part due to their reliance on gelatinous prey which were abundant. 

Both Fraser River and Columbia River sockeye incurred huge in-river
mortalities to returning adults in 2015 due to elevated river
temperatures.  The following year (2016), Fraser sockeye had the
smallest return on record (total run of less than 1 million fish), but
was even lower in 2019 ( 500,000 fish), as progeny of the 2015 year
class returned as adults (Figure 127). The 2020 Fraser sockeye return
was even lower at less than 300,000 fish. In contrast, Columbia River
sockeye returns were relatively high in 2016 (326,000), below 90,000 in
both 2017 and 2019, but reached 341,000 in 2020.

![](./media/media/image140.png){width="5.766666666666667in"
height="2.5881944444444445in"}

Figure . Total run size of Fraser River sockeye salmon (left) and
Bonneville Dam counts for Columbia River sockeye salmon (right) during
2000-2020. Data from PSC (PSC.org) and Fish Passage Center (fpc.org)
websites.

In Alaska there was a strong east-west gradient in run size, with
western Alaska generally having exceptionally high salmon returns, while
central and southeast Alaska saw declines. Perhaps most impressive has
been annual the catch of Bristol Bay sockeye salmon during 2015-19,
which were among the eight highest years since 1975, including 2nd
highest (2019) and 3rd (2018) highest (Figure 128; (Salomone *et al.*
2019)). Similarly, 2017 was the highest statewide catch of chum salmon
on record due in part to record Prince William Sound catches. By
contrast, pink salmon catches have had both high and low abundances,
with 2015 and 2017 having extremely high and 2016 and 2018 extremely low
catches, with 2018 being the lowest pink return to SE Alaska since 1980
(Figure 128).

![](./media/media/image141.png){width="6.966666666666667in"
height="2.345833333333333in"}

Figure . Alaska statewide harvest of pink salmon (left), and chum and
sockeye (center), and total inshore run size of Bristol Bay sockeye
salmon, 2000-2020. Note differences in scales on graphs. Data from ADFG
website and Salomone et al. 2019.

#### Other apex fishes

Reports from northern waters suggest changes to the abundance of several
apex fishes.  Anderson and Workman (Anderson & Workman 2019) report the
return of spiny dogfish (*Squalus acanthias*) to west coast Vancouver
Island surveys in 2018 after absence of 4 years.  Arrowtooth flounder
(*Atheresthes stomas*) were increasing off Vancouver Island, an increase
that extends to the eastern and western Gulf of Alaska and the eastern
Bering Sea after an initial decline due to the heatwave.  Sablefish
(*Anoplopoma fimbria*) have also been increasing in Alaskan waters. Add
the sentence \"Landings of Pacific hake were extremely high in 2017 and
2018 (Berger *et al.* 2019).

One species that has not fared well in northern waters were Pacific cod
(*Gadus macrocephalus*).  The biomass was extremely high in 2015, then
crashed.  The 2017 Gulf of Alaska survey yielded the lowest biomass of
Pacific cod in the time series, down more than 80% since 2013, resulting
in the reduction or closure of many Alaskan cod fisheries in 2018.  Apex
fish predator biomass in the western Aleutian Islands was also the
lowest in 2018 since the time series began in 1991, due to declines in
both Pacific cod and arrowtooth flounder.

Concurrent with these changes in the abundance of resident fish was the
dramatic northwards change in the spatial distributions of many fishes
and some invertebrates in both 2015 and 2019 in response to warm water. 
Notable observations included subtropical opah (*Lampris spp.*),
billfish (Istiophoriformes), dorado (*Coryphaena hippurus*), and
yellowtail jack (*Seriola lalandi*) caught off the Oregon and Washington
coasts in both years (E. Schindler, ODFW, pers. comm.), finescale
triggerfish (*Balistes polylepis*) and Louvar fish (*Luvarus
imperialis)* off Vancouver Island, and ocean sunfish (*Mola mola*),
albacore tuna (*Thunnus alalunga*), Pacific bonito (*Sarda lineolata*),
and thresher (*Alopias vulpinus*) and blue sharks (*Prionace glauca*) in
Alaska in 2015.  There were also tropical sea snakes seen in southern
California in 2015, and an invasion of pelagic red crabs (*Pleuroncodes
planipes*) that covered the beaches in southern California in 2015 and
made it as far north as Newport, Oregon, in 2016.

#### Seabird productivity

Seabirds consume forage fish that are present at predictable locations
and times.  Their ability to successfully feed and fledge their chicks
(or themselves) is therefore a valuable indicator of the abundance and
diversity of forage fish.  Measures of chick success have varied widely
over the last 5 years, and depend on the bird's mode of foraging.  For
example, in the Semidi Islands archipelago (west of Kodiak),
surface-feeding black legged kittiwakes (*Rissa tridactyla*) had chick
failure in 2019, while diving seabirds on the island had good success in
the same season.  Across reported species and locations, in general
chick success was low in 2015 and 2016, rebounded in 2017 and 2018 and
declined again in 2019.

There have also been several massive seabird die offs in response to the
2014-2016 northeast Pacific marine heat wave.  In winter 2014/15 there
was a massive dieoff of Cassin's auklet (*Ptychoramphus aleuticus*) from
northern California to northern Washington.  It is estimated that
50,000-100,000 birds died (Coastal Observation and seabird survey team,
coasst.org).  These birds largely consume krill, and the late Bill
Peterson (NWFSC) speculated that the warm water prevented the krill from
reaching surface waters where the auklets could feed on them (B.
Peterson, pers. comm.). A rigorous analysis suggests that reduced energy
content of zooplankton paired with congregations of birds in a narrow
coldwater band along the coast were to blame for the dieoff (Jones et
al. 2018).

Another species to suffer a massive dieoffs were common murres (*Uria
aalge*).  An estimated 1 million common murres died between summer 2015
and spring 2016.  The mortality event affected birds from California to
Alaska. Most birds were severely emaciated and, so far, no evidence for
anything other than starvation was found to explain this mass mortality
(Piatt et al. 2020).  Many colonies also suffered reproductive failure
in 2016-2017, and another large common murre mortality event occurred
along the Washington/Oregon coasts in fall 2019.

#### Marine mammals

In the California Current, the most obvious impact to marine mammals was
the widespread starvation of California Sea Lion (*Zalophus
californianus*) pups in early 2015, resulting in nearly 1,500
malnourished and sick sea lion pups found along California beaches. 
Strandings in 2015 were the most extreme year in the [[2013-2016
California Sea Lion Unusual Mortality
event]{.underline}](https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/marine-life-distress/2013-2016-california-sea-lion-unusual-mortality-event-california). 

Poor feeding conditions in southern California in 2015 also led to a
dramatic increase in the number of California sea lions farther north
that summer, especially in the Columbia River, where they fed on
returning adult salmon. While the number of California and Stellar
(*Eumetopias jubatus*) sea lions in the Columbia River (at Bonneville
Dam) in the spring has declined since the peak in 2015, the number of
Steller sea lions observed at Bonneville Dam and Willamette Falls has
been increasing in the fall (Wright *et al.* 2014; Tidwell *et al.*
2019).  A new Steller sea lion rookery has been established on the north
Washington Coast (Carroll Island/Sea Lion Rock complex) with over 100
pups born there in 2015 (Muto *et al.* 2020), which, along with a
rookery off the north Oregon Coast, are likely sources of increased
Steller sea lions in the Columbia River. 

Since 2015, there have been two large whale Unusual Mortality events. 
The first Event occurred in the western Gulf of Alaska and British
Columbia in 2015-16 (Savage 2017).  A total of 52 whales were reported
dead, consisting of 17 fin whales (*Balaenoptera physalus*) and 34
humpback (*Megaptera novaeangliae*) whales. A definitive cause of death
could not be determined, but was generally blamed on anomalous physical
and biological shifts in the marine environment.  The 2nd Event was
declared for gray whales (*Eschrichtius robustus*) 2019.  This event
only affected a single species but over 250 whales were reported
stranded from Mexico to Alaska.

### Using Ocean Indicators to Predict Salmon Returns

The NWFSC's *Annual Salmon Forecast* webpage provides annual summaries
of ocean indicators based on large-scale physical, regional-scale
physical, and local-scale biological data that occur in the year of
ocean entry for salmon smolts.  This initial summer of ocean life is
when most marine mortality is believed to occur therefore the indicators
describe the conditions experienced by salmon during a critical period.
Annual values (columns in Figure 129) for each indicator (rows) have
been compared to subsequent Columbia River coho and Chinook salmon
returns one and two years later, respectively.  The qualitative
stoplight table rates each indicator in terms of its \"good,\" \"bad,\"
or \"neutral\" relative impact on salmon marine survival.  Under this
system, the "best" year for that indicator receives a rank of one while
the worst year receives the rank equal to the number of years in the
time series (22 with year 2019).  The stoplight chart thus provides
predictions of adult salmon returns one (coho) and two (Chinook) years
in advance based on ocean conditions experienced during the first summer
of ocean life.

Ocean basin-scale physical indicators include the Pacific Decadal
Oscillation (PDO), and the Ocean El Nino index (ONI), while
regional-scale physical indicators include surface and deep water
salinity and temperature measured on the Newport Hydrographic Line
(NHL).  Local biological indicators include the composition and
abundance of copepods and ichthyoplankton along the NHL as well as the
density of juvenile Chinook and coho salmon caught off the
Washington-Oregon coasts during systematic surveys in June.  Although
the indicators were selected to reflect conditions important for
juvenile Chinook and coho salmon survival, they also work for rockfish,
sablefish and sardine recruitment (Peterson *et al.* 2014a), indicating
they capture important variability in conditions in the northern
California Current.

In general, years that are favorable for salmon survival are
characterized by physical conditions that include cold water along the
West Coast before or after the spring outmigration, no El Niño events at
the equator, cold and salty water locally (on the NHL), and an early
onset of upwelling.  Biological conditions that are favorable for salmon
survival include lots of lipid-rich (northern) copepods and abundant
salmon prey, and high densities of juvenile Chinook and coho salmon
caught in the June survey off the Washington-Oregon coasts.  

The pattern of indicators over the last 22 years demonstrate that ocean
conditions vary from periods when most cells are green (indicating
favorable conditions for survival) to periods when most cells are red
(indicating unfavorable conditions for survival)(Figure 129).  For
example, the years 1999-2002 were largely favorable for salmon survival,
the years 2003-2006 were largely unfavorable, etc.  While not all cells
in the same year are uniformly green (=good), red (=poor), or yellow
(=intermediate), in general they show similar patterns.  Ocean entry
year 1998 was the least favorable in the time series, due to the
extremely large 1997/1997 El Niño event (mean indicator rank = 18.5). 
By contrast, 2008 was the most favorable for salmon survival (mean
indicator rank = 2.9).  

For purposes of this document, the stoplight chart indicates that
beginning with ocean entry year 2015, conditions in the Northern
California Current have been highly unfavorable for ocean survival.  The
sole exception was ocean entry year 2018, which was neutral. The mean
rank of indicators during 2015-2019 contained four of the seven worst
years in the 22 year time series, including the 2nd worst overall rank
in 2016 (mean rank = 18.3).  This is the longest stretch of unfavorable
conditions since the time series began in 1998 (Figure 129).

These unfavorable conditions correspond to adult Chinook salmon that
have or will return in 2017- 2021 and adult coho salmon that have or
will return in 2016-2020.  Clearly, both physical and biological ocean
conditions have been unfavorable for juvenile salmon survival in the
Northern California Current, and by extension, to other areas of the
California Current as well.

  

![https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/WCplnlmzdC45tOhpUDuFOQAQTMdLzK77xg-0pPkI9NuP-FZr277eXvScbc2d95klL3VGU0W1lIKa2CjfUEe2IRD15GJhT8RjaScu4CZyJMedBRNODpXI6Sb65um_S\_YUOYp7PGA](./media/media/image142.png){width="6.5in"
height="4.847222222222222in"}

Figure . The "stoplight" chart of ocean indicators used to predict
salmon return returns. Rank scores derived from ocean ecosystem
indicators data and color-coded to reflect ocean conditions for salmon
growth and survival (green = good; yellow = intermediate; red = poor).
Lower numbers indicate better ocean ecosystem conditions, or \"green
lights\" for salmon growth and survival.

### Climate Vulnerability assessment

As trends progress toward warmer oceans and streams, more extreme winter
flood events and summer low flows, loss of snowpack in the mountains and
ocean acidification, salmon face increasing challenges. Though all
salmon share some similarities in their vulnerabilities, particular life
history types, geographic locations, and histories of anthropogenic
stress cause some ESUs/DPSes to be especially vulnerable to climate
change. The Climate Vulnerability Assessment of Pacific Salmon and
Steelhead (Crozier *et al.* 2019a) was conducted to characterize this
variability.

Crozier *et al.* (2019a) analyzed the exposure factors in freshwater and
the ocean, sensitivity factors by life stage and population
characteristics, and adaptive capacity for all listed ESUs/DPSes in the
West Coast Region. Using a methodology developed for all NOAA Science
Centers, an expert panel scored each ESU/DPS for each factor, and
applied a logic rule to rank overall exposure, sensitivity, and
vulnerability. Crozier *et al.* (2019a) provided a discussion of the
scores for each ESU/DPS, which we have attached as a supplement to this
document for greater detail on expected impacts.

Here we briefly summarize the main results of that analysis for the
northern part of the West Coast region, which are shown in Figure 130.
Interior Columbia sockeye and spring Chinook, as well as Willamette
River Chinook, ranked in the highest risk category. A combination of
juvenile and adult life history characteristics put these ESUs at higher
risk. Specifically, their prolonged freshwater rearing, migration and
holding during warm summer months increased their exposure to rising
summer stream temperatures and loss of snowpack, which affects their
migration. The adaptive capacity of these populations is limited by
their relatively low population viability due to anthropogenic impacts
(especially endangered Snake River sockeye). These particular ESUs face
analogous pressures to those at the southern edge of the range, which
are more classically assumed to be the most vulnerable to climate change
(all Central Valley Chinook ESUs and the two southernmost coho ESUs were
also ranked as highly vulnerable).

![](./media/media/image143.tiff){width="5.3125in"
height="4.704729877515311in"}

Figure \-- Climate vulnerability categories for each ESU/DPS was a
product of sensitivity and exposure scores: red indicates very high
vulnerability, orange high, yellow moderate, and green low. Uncertainty
in final ranks was represented with a bootstrap analysis. Borderline
DPSs were those that placed in a higher rank in at least 25% of
resampled data. Borderline sensitivity ranks are shown in italic, and
borderline exposure ranks indicated with asterisks (\*\*\*). All other
cumulative vulnerability ranks were considered likely. Figure courtesy
of Crozier *et al.* (2019a).

Interior and southern steelhead face similar exposures to climate
factors as interior and southern Chinook and coho, but they have
demonstrated greater adaptive capacity and flexibility in life
histories, which reduced their rankings somewhat. Coastal and Puget
Sound Chinook, steelhead and coho and Snake River fall Chinook scored
relatively high in adaptive capacity, largely due to their greater
flexibility in migration and spawn timing. Nonetheless, some of this
diversity within these ESUs may be lost due to climate change.

Pink and chum salmon generally appeared to have lower vulnerability
because of their short freshwater residence, and their early life stages
may be more resilient to shifts in ocean ecosystems (e.g., chum tend to
consume a larger fraction of gelatinous prey, which may become more
abundant with climate change). However, information on the sensitivity
of survival during the marine stage to ocean acidification and other
potential ecosystem changes was highly uncertain. Thus these relative
rankings primarily reflect sensitivities during freshwater life stages.
To see the scores in all sensitivity and exposure factors and a
narrative describing particular risks faced by each ESU/DPS, see S3
Appendix of Crozier *et al.* (2019) included in this document as
Supplement 1.

### ASSESSMENT OF FRESHWATER RESTORATION

Restoration and protection of habitat is widely applied as a long-term
strategy for meeting salmon conservation and recovery goals, redressing,
"\...present or threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment of
species\' habitat or range?"(ESA, Listing factor D). Over the last 20+
years, habitat restoration projects have been planned and executed to
improve freshwater rearing, spawning and migrating habitat for
salmonids. Recovery plans specify the management actions needed to meet
recovery and habitat restoration goals for each Evolutionarily
Significant Unit or Distinct Population Segment. To tie management
actions to ecological needs, we compiled habitat project and ecological
needs data to provide a way to show, over time, how projects are
addressing habitat across the broad scale of PNW salmon recovery.

We read each ESU/ DPS recovery plan for mentions of habitat concerns
(e.g. limiting factors, impaired habitat etc.). Habitat concerns
described as 'primary' or 'major' within a population were assumed to
capture the most pertinent problems. The recovery plans cover 275
populations nested within 18 ESU/DPSs and were finalized from 2000 to
the present.  The habitat concerns in recovery plans were translated
into a standardized form using the ecological concerns data dictionary,
developed to classify degraded salmon habitat in the Pacific Northwest
(Hamm 2012). The ecological concerns data dictionary standardizes
commonly used terms to describe habitat degradation e.g. limiting
factors, problems, concerns, impacts etc.  The data dictionary enabled
conversion of static text documents into a standardized, queryable,
database of ecological concerns compatible with Geographical Information
Systems (GIS).

The Pacific Northwest Salmon Habitat Project Database (PNSHP), served as
the source for completed habitat restoration projects
([[http://webapps.nwfsc.noaa.gov/pnshp]{.underline}](http://webapps.nwfsc.noaa.gov/pnshp),
(Katz *et al.* 2007)).  A restoration project was defined as any action
involving physical changes to freshwater or estuarine habitat.  All
restoration project records contain a type and subtype as well as a
spatial location, enabling sampling at any scale using GIS. The queries
included projects completed in the 27 years since the first Pacific
Salmon ESA listing (1992 -- 2018).

Restoration projects were spatially queried for each population within
an ESU/DPS, then compared to ecological concerns gathered from recovery
plans.  Comparing restoration to ecological need at the population scale
allows the calculation of both the percentage of projects matching or
failing to match the ecological concerns, and the number of ecological
concerns are addressed by at least one project.  We created a metric,
the Salmon Habitat Assessment and Project Evaluator (SHAPE), which is
calculated as the proportion of ecological concerns addressed, minus the
proportion of projects without any match within an assessment unit.

In this hypothetical example population (Table 68), the recovery plan
calls out 7/9 ecological concerns as problems (YES/NO). Six of the seven
ecological concern categories have one or more projects addressing them,
so are considered a match (YES, number of projects of that type). One
recovery plan concern category, Water Quality, has no restoration
projects addressing it. Three restoration projects address Habitat
Quantity, though Habitat Quantity was not called out in the Recovery
Plan as a major ecological concern.

![https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/otSPdFjPZcX02EhjUqMTQyFL6S6PaqH6z63xSTg1XKWdBOcV7N29j-oVLiQGdHb5RQSG6c1tayEsWF0NksYp8Op_H456-DRpMtXI0udTZJUJqCbYexwmCi29-lfxpx2_5gQQS50](./media/media/image144.png){width="6.5in"
height="1.7430555555555556in"}

**Table 68. Example population comparison of recovery plan ecological
concerns and projects that target those types of ecological concern.**

Using our metric (SHAPE Metric = (EC Addressed/Total EC) -- (Projects
not addressing EC/Total Projects)), the example population in Table 65
scores a .785 (SHAPE = (6/7) - (3/42) =.785). Population scores range
from 1 meaning all ecological concern types called out in the recovery
plan have one or more restoration projects that target those ecological
concerns(Figure 131, Figure 132) to -1 if there is a total mismatch e.g.
ecological concerns have no restoration projects that treat those
concern types, or there are no ecological concerns, but are projects. If
there are no restoration projects within a population spatial unit, then
the SHAPE score defaults to 0

Populations with scores closer to one have better agreement between
types of ecological concern and the projects that have been completed.
However, a high score does not signify that all restoration has been
completed. Populations with scores below .5 (colored in red, orange, and
yellow Figure 132) identify places to focus effort on ecological
concerns not yet treated by projects, or project types implemented that
do not address ECs identified in the recovery plan.  In aggregate,
Steelhead populations had the highest SHAPE score of any species
signaling a good match between habitat need and project types
implemented (Figure 131, Figure 132).

The SHAPE metric is designed as a tool to help inform decision making,
and restoration project planning. This approach does not take into
account socio-economic factors which also influence project type choice
and project placement. Moving forward, of SHAPE scores can be used to
show progress, in 5 year increments, towards alignment between
restoration and habitat needs for salmon. 

![https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/ZIIuw9F9DI3WSLcFHmLsxHiWxYUtlE7bXKIa7t9wkLLAyS8vgmBe0fCjsLztlt3e-vKD8mSmZtvB2jeUudzrMa4hnJBMNzMvL03ynb7VEKcyeHjxlZ2ECanvFtRook6EUgp7eSM](./media/media/image145.png){width="6.5in"
height="5.076388888888889in"}

**Figure 131. Distribution of population SHAPE scores by species. **

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-IjlblmwywpZMeyzqMtc_9c4spMozXCWBRInnPwVGvlk0PltthlBFD28ReZwXJdsPLjU22Ofp-oKGBUi_o9jC3xCeOVq7YdK2h-u8WtVCXwc1RnmT3tiq2_a76NzZ072E-pHPwo](./media/media/image146.png){width="6.5in"
height="4.881944444444445in"}

**Figure 132. Spatial distribution of SHAPE score across all
populations.**

# Literature Cited

Ackerman M, Vu N, McCane J*, et al.* (2014) Chinook and Steelhead
genotyping for genetic stock identification at Lower Granite Dam.
Proj.#2010-026-00 Rept. to BPA. 68p.

Ackerman N, Pyper B (2020a) Clackamas River Project (FERC No. 2195).
Appendix D, Article 32(b), and Appendix E, Article 32(a). 62p.

Ackerman NK, Pyper B (2020b) Clackamas River Project (FERC No. 2195).
Appendix D, Article 32(b), and Appendix E, Article 32(a). 62p.

Anderson S, Workman G (2019) A review of groundfish surveys in 2018 and
an introduction to the groundfish data synopsis report. In Boldt, J.L.,
Leonard, J., and Chandler, P.C. (Eds.). 2019. State of the physical,
biological and selected fishery resources of Pacific Canadian marine
ecosystems in 2018. Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 3314: vii + 248 p.

Arnsberg B, Alcorn B, Tiffan K, Bickford B, Oakerman A (2020a) 2019
Snake River fall Chinook salmon spawning summary. Cooperative report by
the Nez Perce Tribe, Idaho Power Company, U.S. Geological Survey, and
the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Available at
<https://www.cbfish.org/Document.mvc/Viewer/P164600>.

Arnsberg B, Broncheau B, Sublett M*, et al.* (2020b) Snake River Fall
Chinook Salmon Spawning Summary. Nez Perce Tribe, Idaho Power Company,
and Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. 8pp. .

Atcheson ME, Myers KW, Davis ND, Mantua NJ (2012) Potential
trophodynamic and environmental drivers of steelhead (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) productivity in the North Pacific Ocean. *Fisheries
Oceanography* **21**, 321-335.

Banks MA, Sard NM, O'Malley KG*, et al.* (2014a) A genetics-based
evaluation of the spring Chinook salmon reintroduction program above
cougar Dam, South Fork McKenzie Rivr, 2007-2013. June 2014 Report to the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 34p.

Banks SK, Bare CM, DeHart KB*, et al.* (2013) Escapement and
Productivity of Steelhead and Spring Chinook Salmon in the John Day
River, 2012 Annual Report, Bonneville Power Administration Project
1998-016-00, 185 pp.

Banks SK, Bare CM, DeHart KB*, et al.* (2014b) Escapement and
Productivity of Steelhead and Spring Chinook Salmon in the John Day
River, 2013 Annual Report, Bonneville Power Administration Project
1998-016-00, 92 pp.

Bare CM, DeHart KB, Salgado JA*, et al.* (2015) Escapement and
Productivity of Steelhead and Spring Chinook Salmon in the John Day
River, 2014 Annual Report, Bonneville Power Administration Project
1998-016-00, 89 pp.

Bates SS, Hubbard KA, Lundholm N, Montresor M, Leaw CP (2018)
Pseudo-nitzschia, Nitzschia, and domoic acid: new research since 2011.
*Harmful Algae* **79**, 3-43.

Beamish RJ (2018) The ocean ecology of Pacific salmon and trout.
American Fisheries Society, Bethesda, MD.

Beeman JW, Hansel HC, Hansen AC*, et al.* (2013) Behavior and dam
passage of juvenile Chinook salmon at Cougar Reservoir and Dam, Oregon,
March 2011. February 2012. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2013
1079, 48 p.

Berejikian BA, Moore ME, Jeffries SJ (2016) Predator-prey interactions
between harbor seals and migrating steelhead trout smolts revealed by
acoustic telemetry. *Marine Ecology Progress Series* **543**, 21-35.

Berger AM, Edwards AM, Grandin CJ, Johnson KF (2019) Status of the
Pacific Hake (whiting) stock in U.S. and Canadian waters in 2019.
Prepared by the Joint Technical Committee of the U.S. and Canada Pacific
Hake/Whiting Agreement, National Marine Fisheries Service and Fisheries
and Oceans Canada. 249 p.

Boldt JL, Leonard J, Chandler PC (2019) State of the Physical,
Biological and Selected Fishery Resources of (Pacific) Canadian Marine
Ecosystems in 2018. *Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci* **3314**.

Bowersox BJ, Corsi MP, McCormick JL, Copeland T, Campbell MR (2019)
Examining life history shifts and genetic composition in a hatchery
steelhead population, with implications for fishery and ocean selection.
*Transactions of the American Fisheries Society* **148**, 1056-1068.

Brodeur R, Perry I, Boldt J*, et al.* (2018) An unusual gelatinous
plankton event in the NE Pacific: the great pyrosome bloom of 2017.
*PICES press* **26**, 22-27.

Brodeur RD, Auth TD, Phillips AJ (2019) Major shifts in pelagic
micronekton and macrozooplankton community structure in an upwelling
ecosystem related to an unprecedented marine heatwave. *Frontiers in
Marine Science* **6**, 212.

Bugert R, Hopley B (1989) The Snake River Fall Chinook Salmon egg bank
program: the final chapter. Pages 148-153 in R.Z. Smith (ed.)
Proceedings of the 1989 Northwest Fish Culture Conference. Glendedon
Beach. Oregon.

Bugert R, LaRiviere P, Marbach D*, et al.* (1990) Lower Snake River
Compensation Plan Salmon Hatchery Evaluation Program. 1989 annual
report. USFWS, LSRCP, Boise, Idaho.

Bugert RM, C.W. Hopley, C.A. Busack, and G.W. Mendel. (1995) Maintenance
of stock integrity in Snake River Fall chinook salmon. *American
Fisheries Society Symposium* **15**, 267-276.

Bumgarner JD, Dedloff J (2015) Lyons Ferry Hatchery Complex Summer
Steelhead Evaluations 2012 Run Year Annual Report. WDFW Rept. prepared
for USFWS Lower Snake River Compensation Plan Office. July 2015. 48 p.

Burgner R (1992) Distribution and origins of steelhead trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss) in offshore waters of the North Pacific Ocean.
*INPRC Bulletin* **51**, 1-92.

Busby PJ, Wainwright TC, Bryant GJ*, et al.* (1996) Status Review of
West Coast Steelhead from Washington, Idaho, Oregon, and California.
*NOAA Technical Memorandum* **NMFS-NWFSC-27**.

Caldwell L, Cramer S (2015) Oregon Coast Coho ESU Status Review
Comments. Analysis of historical data and alternate hypotheses for
estimating population dynamics.

CBR, Washington Uo (2020) Columbia River Data Access in Real Time
(DART). Available from <http://www.cbr.washington.edu/dart>.

Chandler PC, King SA, Boldt J (2017) State of the physical, biological
and selected fishery resources of Pacific Canadian marine ecosystems in
2016. Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 3225: 243 + vi p.

Cleary P, Young B, Oakerman A, Milks D (2018) Snake River Fall Chinook
Salmon Fidelity and Fallback Study: Final Annual Progress Report for
2013 to 2017 Adult Radio Telemetry Results. Nez Perce Tribe, Department
of Fisheries Resources Management, Orofino, ID.
<https://www.cbfish.org/Document.mvc/Viewer/P164872>.

Columbia River DART, Columbia Basin Research, Washington Uo (2020) PIT
Tag Smolt-to-Adult Return (SAR) Estimates. Available from
<http://www.cbr.washington.edu/dart/query/pit_sar_esu>.

Connor WP, Garcia AP, Connor AH*, et al.* (2001) Estimating the Carrying
Capacity of the Snake River for Fall Chinook Salmon Redds. *Northwest
Science* **75**, 363-371.

Connor WP, Tiffan KF, Chandler JA*, et al.* (2019) Upstream Migration
and Spawning Success of Chinook Salmon in a Highly Developed, Seasonally
Warm River System. *Reviews in Fisheries Science & Aquaculture* **27**,
1-50.

Copeland T, Ackerman MW, Wright KK, Byrne A (2017) Life history
diversity of Snake River steelhead populations between and within
management categories. *North American Journal of Fisheries Management*
**37**, 395-404.

Copeland T, Bumgarner JD, Byrne A*, et al.* (2015a) Reconstruction of
the 2012/2013 steelhead spawning run into the Snake River basin. Report
to Bonneville Power Administration. 32 p. .

Copeland T, Ziolkowski EW, Roberts RV, Apperson KA (2015b) Idaho
steelhead monitoring and evaluation studies Annual Progress Report
January 1 2014-December 31, 2014. IDFG Report No. 15-12.

Council PFM (2020) Review of 2019 ocean salmon fisheries. Available at
<https://www.pcouncil.org/safe-documents-3/>.

Courter II, Child DB, Hobbs JA*, et al.* (2013) Resident rainbow trout
produce anadromous offspring in a large interior watershed. *Canadian
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences* **70**, 701-710.

Cram J, Kendall N, Marshall A*, et al.* (2018) Steelhead at risk report:
assessment of Washington's steelhead populations. Washington Department
of Fish Wildlife. 181 p.

Crawford BA, Rumsey SM (2011) Guidance for Monitoring Recovery of
Pacific Northwest Salmon & Steelhead listed under the Federal Endangered
Species Act. National Marine Fisheries Service. 117 p.

Crewson M, Haggerty M, Ritchie A*, et al.* (2001) Genetic
characterization of Lake Ozette sockeye salmon for enhancement recovery
strategies. Final Rep. Research. Hatchery Scientific Review Group, IAC
Grant 01-038. Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation, Olympia, WA.

Crozier L, Weisebron L, Burke B*, et al.* (2018) Migration survival of
adult Snake River sockeye salmon through the Columbia River Basin.
Research Report for US Army Corps of Engineers, Walla Walla District
<https://www.webapps.nwfsc.noaa.gov/assets/26/9567_03132020_144513_Crozier.et.al.2018-Adult-Sockeye-2008-2017-USACE.pdf>.
.

Crozier LG, Hendry AP, Lawson PW*, et al.* (2008) Potential responses to
climate change in organisms with complex life histories: evolution and
plasticity in Pacific salmon. *Evolutionary Applications* **1**,
252-270.

Crozier LG, McClure MM, Beechie T*, et al.* (2019a) Climate
vulnerability assessment for Pacific salmon and steelhead in the
California Current Large Marine Ecosystem. *Plos One* **14**, e0217711.
<https://doi.org/0217710.0211371/journal.pone.0217711>.

Crozier LG, McClure MM, Beechie T*, et al.* (2019b) Climate
vulnerability assessment for Pacific salmon and steelhead in the
California Current Large Marine Ecosystem. *Plos One* **14**.

Crozier LG, Siegel JE, Wiesebron LE*, et al.* (2020) Snake River sockeye
and Chinook salmon in a changing climate: Implications for upstream
migration survival during recent extreme and future climates. *Plos One*
**15**.

Currens K, Fuerstenberg R, Graeber W*, et al.* (2009) Identification of
an independent population of sockeye salmon in Lake Ozette, Washington.
U.S. Dept. of Commerce, NOAA Tech. Memo., NMFS-NWFSC-96, 18 p.

Dauble DD, Hanrahan TP, Geist DR, Parsley MJ (2003) Impacts of the
Columbia River hydroelectric system on main-stem habitats of fall
Chinook salmon. *North American Journal of Fisheries Management* **23**,
641-659.

David MM, Ackerman N, Wyatt G, Cramer D (2016) Upstream fish passage
effectiveness monitoring, 2015 annual report. Clackamas River Project
(FERC 2195). Prepared by Portland General Electric.

Denny L, Blackadar RJ (2015) 2014 Yankee Fork Salmon River Chinook
Salmon Run Report Annual Report. Prepared for USFWS Lower Snake River
Compensation Plan Office. May 2015. 42 p.

Denton K (2018) Estimating the 2017 Sockeye Salmon Escapement into Lake
Ozette Using an ARIS multi-beam SONAR. Prepared by Keith Denton, K.
Denton and Associates, LLC, 672 Hooker Rd. Sequim, WA 98382,
keith8denton@gmail.com For: NOAA, West Coast Region, 510 Desmond Dr.
Lacey, WA, 98503.

Di Lorenzo E, Mantua N (2016) Multi-year persistence of the 2014/15
North Pacific marine heatwave. Nat. Climate Change,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3082.

Dlugokenski C, Bradshaw W, Hager S (1981) An investigation of the
limiting factors to Lake Ozette sockeye salmon production and a plan for
their restoration. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Fisheries Assistance
Office, Olympia, WA.

Dornbush P (2013) ESA Recovery Plan for: Lower Columbia River coho
salmon, Lower Columbia River Chinook salmon, Lower Columbia River Chum
Salmon, and Lower Columbia River steelhead. Prepared by the National
Marine Fisheries Service. 503 p.

Duguid WD, Boldt JL, Chalifour L*, et al.* (2019) Historical
fluctuations and recent observations of Northern Anchovy Engraulis
mordax in the Salish Sea. *Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in
Oceanography* **159**, 22-41.

Evans ML, Johnson MA, Jacobson D*, et al.* (2016) Evaluating a
multi-generational reintroduction program for threatened salmon using
genetic parentage analysis. *Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences* **73**, 844-852.

Falcy MR, Suring E (2018) Detecting the effects of management regime
shifts in dynamic environments using multi-population state-space
models. *Biological Conservation* **221**, 34-43.

Faulkner JR, Widener D, Smith S, Marsh T, Zabel R (2018) Survival
estimates for the passage of spring migrating juvenile salmonids through
Snake and Columbia River dams and reservoirs, 2017. Draft report of the
National Marine Fisheries Service to the Bonneville Power
Administration. Portland, Oregon. Available at
<https://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/contact/display_staffprofilepubs.cfm?staffid=1524>.

Felts E, Barnett B, Davison M*, et al.* (2020) Idaho adult Chinook
Salmon monitoring. Annual Report 2019. Idaho Department of Fish and Game
Report. .

Ford M, Cooney T, McElhany P*, et al.* (2011) Status review update for
Pacific salmon and steelhead listed under the Endangered Species Act:
Northwest. *NOAA Technical Memorandum NWFSC* **113**, 1-281.

Ford MJ, Budy P, Busack C*, et al.* (2001) Upper Columbia River
Steelhead and Spring Chinook Salmon Population Structure and Biological
Requirements, Final report. Northwest Fisheries Science Center, Seattle,
WA.

Ford MJ, Murdoch A, Hughes M (2015) Using parentage analysis to estimate
rates of straying and homing in Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus
tshawytscha). *Molecular Ecology* **24**, 1109-1121.

Ford MJ, Murdoch AR, Hughes MS, Seamons TR, LaHood ES (2016) Broodstock
History Strongly Influences Natural Spawning Success in Hatchery
Steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss). *Plos One* **11**.

Ford MJ, Teel D, Van Doornik DM, Kuligowski D, Lawson PW (2004) Genetic
population structure of central Oregon coast coho salmon (*Oncorhynchus
kisutch*). *Conservation Genetics* **5**, 797-812.

Frederiksen CR, Fast DE, Bosch WJ, Temple GM (2014) Yakima Steelhead VSP
Project:Yakima River Steelhead population status and trends monitoring.
Yakima Nation Fisheries & WDFW Rept. to the Bonneville Power
Administration. BPA project #2010-030-00. 54 p.

Galbraith M, Young K (2019) West coast British Columbia zooplankton
biomass anomalies 2018. In Boldt, J.L., Leonard, J., and Chandler, P.C.
(Eds.). 2019. State of the physical, biological and selected fishery
resources of Pacific Canadian marine ecosystems in 2018. Can. Tech. Rep.
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 3314: vii + 248 p. .

Gleizes C, Serl J, Zimmerman M, Glaser B, Dammers W (2014) Lower Cowlitz
River monitoring and evaluation, 2013. Washington Department of Fish and
Wildlife. 66p.

Good TP, Waples RS, Adams P (2005) Updated status of federally listed
ESUs of West Coast salmon and steelhead. U.S. Dept. Commer., NOAA Tech.
Memo. NMFS-NWFSC-66., p. 598.

Gregory JS, Wood CL (2013) Yankee Fork drainage fisheries summary and
analysis. Final Report to Bureau of Reclimation. February 2013. 57 p. .

Groves P, Alcorn B, Wiest M, Maselko J, Connor W (2016) Testing unmanned
aircraft systems for salmon spawning surveys. *Facets* **1**, 187-204.

Groves PA, Chandler JA, Alcorn B*, et al.* (2013) Evaluating salmon
spawing habitat capacity using redd survey data. *North American Journal
of Fisheries Management* **33**, 707-716.

Gustafson RS, Wainwright TC, Winans GA*, et al.* (1997) Status Review of
Sockeye Salmon from Washington and Oregon. *NOAA Technical Memorandum*
**NMFS-NWFSC-33.**

Haggerty MJ (2014) A summary of Lake Ozette sockeye salmon run-size
estimates for return years 2004 through 2012. Unpublished draft report
(version 2.3) submitted to National Marine Fisheries Service, 103pp,
Portland, Oregon.

Haggerty MJ, Ritchie AC, Shellberg JG, Crewson MJ, Jalonen J (2009) Lake
Ozette Sockeye Limiting Factors Analysis. Prepared for the Makah Indian
Tribe and NOAA Fisheries in Cooperation with the Lake Ozette Sockeye
Steering Committee, Port Angeles, Washington.

Hamm DE (2012) Development and evaluation of a data dictionary to
standardize salmonid habitat assessments in the Pacific Northwest.
*Fisheries* **37**, 6-18.

Harbeck JR, Espinosa NP, Shoudel EM (2015) Imnaha River steelhead
Onchorhynchus mykiss adult monitoring project. Nez Perce Tribe 2013
Annual Report. Prepared for Bonneville Power Administration. Project
number 2012-032-00. 92 p.

Hard JJ, Myers JM, Conner EJ*, et al.* (2015) Viability criteria for
steelhead within the Puget Sound distinct population segment. NOAA
Technical Memorandum NMFS-NWFSC-129.

Hard JJ, Myers JM, Ford MJ*, et al.* (2007) *Status review of Puget
Sound steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss). U.S. Dept. of Commerce, NOAA
Tech. Memo., NMFS-NWFSC-81*.

Hargrove JS, Delomas T, McCane J*, et al.* (2020) Chinook Salmon and
steelhead genotyping for genetic stock identification at Lower Granite
Dam. Idaho Department of Fish and Game Report 20-05. Annual Report 27
2019. BPA Project 2010-026-00. <https://collaboration.idfg.idaho.gov/>
FisheriesTechnicalReports/Forms/AllItems.aspx.

Harvey C, Garfield NT, Williams G*, et al.* (2020) Ecosystem Status
Report of the California Current for 2019-20: A Summary of Ecosystem
Indicators Compiled by the California Current Integrated Ecosystem
Assessment Team (CCIEA).

Harvey CJ, Garfield N, Williams GD*, et al.* (2018) Ecosystem Status
Report of the California Current for 2018: A Summary of Ecosystem
Indicators Compiled by the California Current Integrated Ecosystem
Assessment Team (CCIEA).

Harvey E (2014) Rock Creek fish and habitat assessment for
prioritization of restoration and protection actions. June 1, 2008 --
May 31, 2013. Yakima Indian Nation Fisheries Department Report to
Bonneville Power Administration. 264 p.

Hawkins D (2004) WDFW Fish Program, Science Division, Conservation
Biology, Genetics Laboratory, Unpublished report, 29pp.

HCCC (2005) Hood Canal and Eastern Strait of Juan de Fuca Summer chum
Salmon Recovery Plan, Prepared by Scott Brewer, Jay Watson, Dave
Christensen, and Richard Brocksmith. Draft Version Nov. 15, 2005.

Hebdon JL, Kline P, Taki D, Flagg TA (2004) Evaluating reintroduction
strategies for redfish lake sockeye salmon captive broodstock progeny.
In: *Propagated Fish in Resource Management* (eds. Nickum MJ, Mazik PM,
Nickum JG, Mackinlay DD), pp. 401-413.

Hershberger W, Seeb J, Aebersold P (1982) Unpubl. manuscr. Genetic
analysis of the sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) returning to Lake
Ozette, report dated 1982. (Available from Steve Joner, Makah Fisheries
Management, P.O. Box 115, Neah Bay, WA 98357.).

Hillman T, Miller M, Willard C*, et al.* (2015) Monitoring and
evaluation of the Chelan and Grant County PUDs Hatchery Programs. 2014
Annual Report. Prepared for: HCP Hatchery Committee and PRCC Hatchery
Sub-Committee Wenatchee and Ephrata, WA. 748 p.

Hinton J, Cooke L (2016) Lake Ozette Sockeye Resource Management Plan
Final Report. Makah Fisheries Management. P.O. Box 115, Neah Bay, WA
98357, 57 p.

Hinton J, Cooke L (2019) Lake Ozette Sockeye Resource Management Plan
2015 & 2016 Final Report. Makah Fisheries Management. P.O. Box 115, Neah
Bay, WA 98357, 114 p.

Homel K (2014) Chum Salmon reintroduction plan. Draft. Oregon Department
of Fish and Wildlife, Clackamas, OR, 200 pps.

HSRG (2009) Columbia River Hatchery Reform System-Wide Report. Hatchery
Scientific Review Group. February 2009. 272 p.

ICTRT (2003) Independent Populations of Chinook, Steelhead, and Sockeye
for Listed Evolutionarily Significant Units Within the Interior Columbia
River Domain. Working Draft July 2003.

ICTRT (2005) Interior Columbia Basin TRT: Viability critieria for
application to Interior Columbia Basin Salmonid ESUs. Available at
<http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/trt/trt_viability.cfm>.

ICTRT (2007a) Interior Columbia Basin TRT: Viability critieria for
application to Interior Columbia Basin Salmonid ESUs. Available at
<http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/trt/trt_viability.cfm>.

ICTRT (2007b) Required survival rate changes to meet Technical Recovery
Team abundance and productivity viability criteria for Interior Columbia
River Basin salmon and steelhead populations. November, 2007. Available
at
<http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/trt/col_docs/ictrt_gaps_report_nov_2007_final.pdf>.

ICTRT (2010) Current status reviews: Interior Columbia basin ESUs and
DPSs. Vol. 1. Snake River Basin ESUs/DPS. Interior Columbia Recovery
Team. 812 p + Appendices.

Jacox MG, Alexander M, Mantua N*, et al.* (2018) Multiyear extreme ocean
temperatures with impacts on living marine resources off the US west
coast during 2016. \[in "Explaining Extreme Events of 2016 from a
Climate Perspective"\]. . *Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.* **99** S27-S33, .

Jepson MA, Keefer ML, Caudill CC*, et al.* (2015) Migratory behavior,
run timing, and distribution of radio-tagged adults winter steelhead,
summer steelhead, spring Chinook salmon, and coho salmon in the
Willamette River: 2011-2014. Technical Report 2015-1-DRAFT. 117p.

Jepson MA, Keefer ML, Caudill CC, Clabough TS, Sharpe CS (2013)
Migratory behavior, run timing, and distribution of radio-tagged adults
winter steelhead, summer steelhead, and spring Chinook salmon in the
Willamette River-2012. Technical Report 2013-1. U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. 103 p.

Jepson MA, Keefer ML, Clabough TS, Caudill CC, Sharpe CS (2014)
Migratory behavior, run timing, and distribution of radio-tagged adults
winter steelhead, summer steelhead, and spring Chinook salmon in the
Willamette River-2013. Technical Report 2014-4. U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. 110 p.

Jezorek IG, Hardiman JM (2018) Juvenile salmonid monitoring following
removal of Condit Dam in the White Salmon River watershed, Washington,
2017: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2018-1106, 31 p.
<https://doi.org/10.3133/ofr20181106>. .

Johnson E, Plaster K, Kozfkay C, Powell J (2019) Snake River Sockeye
Salmon captive broodstock program, research element 2017-2018. IDFG
Report No. 19-05. Project no. 200740200. Bonneville Power
administration, Annual Report. Portland, Oregon.

Johnson M, Friesen T, Van Doornik D, Teel D, Myers J (2018) Genetic
influence from hatchery stocks on upper Willamette River steelhead
Oncorhynchus mykiss. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. ODFW
Information Report Series 2018-03.

Johnson MA, Friesen TA (2014) Genetic diversity and population structure
of spring Chinook salmon from the upper Willamette River, Oregon. *North
American Journal of Fisheries Management* **34**, 853-862.

Johnson MA, Friesen TA, VanDoornik DM, Teel DJ, Myers JM (2021) Genetic
interactions among native and introduced stocks of Oncorhynchus mykiss
in the upper Willamette River, Oregon. *Conservation Genetics* **22**,
111-124.

Johnson OW, Grant WS, Kope RG*, et al.* (1997) Status Review of Chum
Salmon from Washington, Oregon, and California. *NOAA technical
memorandum. Rockville MD* **NMFS-NWFSC-32**.

Johnstone JA, Mantua NJ (2014) Atmospheric controls on northeast Pacific
temperature variability and change, 1900-2012. *Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* **111**,
14360-14365.

Katz SL, Barnas K, Hicks R, Cowen J, Jenkinson R (2007) Freshwater
Habitat Restoration Actions in the Pacific Northwest: A Decade's
Investment in Habitat Improvement. *Restoration Ecology* **15**,
494-505.

Keefer M, Clabough T, Jepson M*, et al.* (2018) Evaluation of adult
Chinook salmon behavior at the Foster Dam adult fish facility and in
Foster Dam Reservoir on the South Santiam River, 2017. Technical Report
2018-3 Final. 95 p.

Keefer ML, Caudill CC, Peery CA, Lee SR (2008) TRANSPORTING JUVENILE
SALMONIDS AROUND DAMS IMPAIRS ADULT MIGRATION. *Ecological Applications*
**18**, 1888-1900.

Kemmerich J (1939) Letter to Dr. R.E. Foerster from J. Kemmerich, dated
21 June 1939 and titled, ―Subject: Ozette Lake Sockeye Salmon Work.‖. In
Miscellaneous sockeye runs to streams in Washington. File 1510.1-1,
Pacific Salmon Commission Library. 1 p. plus 4 p. attachment. (Available
from Librarian, Pacific Salmon Commission, Suite 600-1155 Robson Street,
Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6E 1B9).

Kendall NW, Marston GW, Klungle MM (2017) Declining patterns of Pacific
Northwest steelhead trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) adult abundance and
smolt survival in the ocean. *Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences* **74**, 1275-1290.

Kinzer R, Orme R, Campbell M, Hargrove J, See K (2020) REPORT TO NOAA
FISHERIES FOR 5-YEAR ESA STATUS REVIEW: SNAKE RIVER BASIN STEELHEAD AND
CHINOOK SALMON POPULATION ABUNDANCE, LIFE HISTORY, AND DIVERSITY METRICS
CALCULATED FROM IN-STREAM PIT- TAG OBSERVATIONS (SY2010-SY2019). January
2020. IPTDSW (In-stream PIT-tag detection systems workgroup).

Kostow KE, Zhou SJ (2006) The effect of an introduced summer steelhead
hatchery stock on the productivity of a wild winter steelhead
population. *Transactions of the American Fisheries Society* **135**,
825-841.

Kozfkay CC, Peterson M, Sandford BP, Johnson EL, Kline P (2019) The
productivity and viability of Snake River Sockeye Salmon hatchery adults
released into Redfish Lake, Idaho. *Transactions of the American
Fisheries Society* **148**, 308-323.

Larsen LG, Woelfle-Erskine C (2018) Groundwater Is Key to Salmonid
Persistence and Recruitment in Intermittent Mediterranean-Climate
Streams. *Water Resources Research* **54**, 8909-8930.

Larson WA, Palti Y, Gao G, Warheit KI, Seeb JE (2018) Rapid discovery of
SNPs that differentiate hatchery steelhead trout from ESA-listed
natural-origin steelhead trout using a 57K SNP array. *Canadian Journal
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences* **75**, 1160-1168.

Lawry KM, Camacho. C, Hargrove J*, et al.* (2020) Wild adult steelhead
and Chinook Salmon abundance and composition at Lower Granite Dam, spawn
year 2019. Annual Report. Idaho Department of Fish and Game Report
20-12.

Lawson P (1992) Estimating Time Series of Oregon Coastal Natural Coho
Salmon Ocean Harvest Rates and Recruitment - Draft Report. Oregon
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Ocean Salmon Management, Newport, OR.

Lawson PW, Bjorkstedt EP, Chilcote MW*, et al.* (2007) Identification of
historical populations of coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch) in the
Oregon coast evolutionarily significant unit. U.S. Dept. of Commerce,
NOAA Tech. Memo., NMFS-NWFSC-79, 129 p.

LCFRB (Lower Columbia Fish Recovery Board) (2020) Summary of actions
addresing threats criteria. Lower Columbia Fish Recovery Board comments
on the 5-years status review for Pacific salmon and steelhead. 67 p.

Lestelle L (2020) Updated viability analysis for the Hood Canal Summer
Chum ESU with data through return year 2019. Hood Canal Coordinating
Council, May 26, 2020.

Lestelle L, Brocksmith R, Johnson T, Sands N (2014) Guidance for
updating recovery goals for the Hood Canal and Strait of Juan de Fuca
Summer Chum Salmon populations. Draft Manu. September 2014. Submitted to
Hood Canal Coordinating Council, Poulsbo, WA. 123 pp.

Lestelle L, Sands N, Johnson T, Downen M (2018) Recovery Goal Review and
updated guidance for the Hood Canal Summer Chum salmon ESU. Hood Canal
Coordinating Council, Poulsbo, WA.

Lewis M (2015) NOAA Fisheries DSS for Oregon Coast Coho ESU. 2015 Five
Year Status Review Update. Reprot by Mark Lewis, Oregon Department of
Fish and Wildlife, Corvallis Research Lab, September 2015.

Lewis M (2020) NOAA Fisheries DSS for Oregon Coast Coho ESU: 2020 Five
Year Status Review Update. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife,
Salem, Oregon.

Liedtke TL, Kock TJ, Rondorf DW (2013) Evaluation of the behavior and
movement patterns of adult coho salmon and steelhead in the North Fork
Toutle River, Washington, 2005--2009: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File
Report 2013-1290, 26 p., <http://dx.doi.org/10.3133/ofr20131290>.

Lindley ST, Grimes CB, 24 coauthors (2009) What caused the Sacramento
River fall Chinook stock collapse? NOAA Tech. Memo.
NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFSC-447.

Liss S, Znotinas K, Hughes J*, et al.* (2020) Evaluation of Foster Dam
Juvenile Fish Passage, 2018. PNNL-29587. Final report.

MacDonald BL, Grant SC, Patterson DA*, et al.* (2019) State of the
Salmon: informing the survival of Fraser sockeye returning in 2019
through life cycle observations. Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 3336:
V + 60 p. Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Science Branch, Pacific Region,
Pacific ....

Makah Fisheries Management (MFM) (2020) Neah Bay, WA 98357Lake Ozette
Sockeye Resource Management Plan 2017 & 2018 & 2019 Final Report. p.
121.

Mapes R, Sharpe C, Friesen T (2017) Evaluation of the trap and transport
of adult steelhead above USACE project dams in the Upper Willamette
Basin. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. USACE Project Study Code
APH-09-01-FOS.

Marshall AR (1997) Report on the genetic analysis of Abernathy Creek
juvenile Chinook. Investigation of natural production by Rogue River
stock hatchery-origin Chinook. Department of Fish and Wildlife. Fish
Management Program. 13 p.

Matala A (2012) Genetic evaluation of Steelhead trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) in the Rock Creek watershed of the middle Columbia Basin. Col.
River Intertribal Fish Comm. Tech. Rept 12-06. 5 p + figs and tables.

Mattson CR (1948) Spawning ground studies of Willamette River spring
chinook salmon. *Fish Comm. Oreg* **1**, 21-32.

McCabe RM, Hickey BM, Kudela RM*, et al.* (2016) An unprecedented
coastwide toxic algal bloom linked to anomalous ocean conditions.
*Geophysical Research Letters* **43**, 10,366-310,376.

McElhany P, Ruckelshaus MH, Ford MJ, Wainwright TC, Bjorkstedt EP (2000)
Viable Salmonid Populations and the Recovery of Evolutionarily
Significant Units. *NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-NWFSC* **42**, 156p.

Metro (2014) 2014 Urban Growth Report. Investing in wour communities
2015-2035. Metro. 30 p.

MFM (2000) (Makah Fisheries Management). Lake Ozette sockeye - hatchery
and genetic management plan -- biological assessment, section 7
consultation. October 23, 2000. Prepared by Makah Fisheries Management
for Bureau of Indian Affairs. Makah Indian Tribe. Neah Bay, Washington.
219p.

MFM (2015) (Makah Fisheries Management). Appendix Lake Ozette Sockeye
Hatchery Genetics Management Plan Extension Request supporting tables.
Prepared by Joseph Hinton, Makah Fisheries Hatchery Manager. Makah
Fisheries Management, Neah Bay, WA.

Milks D, Oakerman A (2018) Lyons Ferry Hatchery Evaluation Fall Chinook
Salmon Annual Report: 2016. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife,
Olympia, WA.
<http://www.fws.gov/lsnakecomplan/reports/WDFWreports.html>.

Miller RR, Santora JA, Auth TD*, et al.* (2019) Distribution of pelagic
thaliaceans, Thetys vagina and Pyrosoma atlanticum, during a period of
mass occurrence within the California Current. *CalCOFI Rep* **60**,
94-108.

Moore M, Berejikian BA, Tezak EP (2013) A Floating Bridge Disrupts
Seaward Migration and Increases Mortality of Steelhead Smolts in Hood
Canal, Washington State. *Plos One* **8**.

Moore ME, Berejikian BA (2017) Population, habitat, and marine location
effects on early marine survival and behavior of Puget Sound steelhead
smolts. *Ecosphere* **8**, e01834.

Moore ME, Berejikian BA, Goetz FA*, et al.* (2015) Multi-population
analysis of Puget Sound steelhead survival and migration behavior.
*Marine Ecology Progress Series* **537**, 217-232.

Moore ME, Berejikian BA, Tezak EP (2010) Early Marine Survival and
Behavior of Steelhead Smolts through Hood Canal and the Strait of Juan
de Fuca. *Transactions of the American Fisheries Society* **139**,
49-61.

Morgan CA, Beckman BR, Weitkamp LA, Fresh KL (2019) Recent ecosystem
disturbance in the Northern California Current. *Fisheries* **44**,
465-474.

Muckleshoot Indian Tribe (2020) Historical and contemporary structure of
Chinook in the greater Lake Washington basin including the Cedar River.
Muckleshoot Indian Tribe, Fisheries Department, Puyallup, WA .8 p.

Mullan JW, Williams KR, Rhodus G, Hillman TW, McIntryre JD (1992)
*Production and Habitat of Salmonids in Mid-Columbia River Tributary
Streams* U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

Murphy CA, Taylor G, Pierce T, Arismendi I, Johnson SL (2019) Short‐term
reservoir draining to streambed for juvenile salmon passage and
non‐native fish removal. *Ecohydrology* **12**, e2096.

Muto MM, Helker VT, Delean B*, et al.* (2020) Alaska Marine Mammal Stock
Assessments, 2019.

Myers J, Busack B, Rawding D*, et al.* (2006) Historical population
structure of Pacific salmonids in the Willamette River and Lower
Columbia River Basins. . *NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-NWFSC-73.
Available at
<http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/assets/25/6490_04042006_153011_PopIdTM73Final.pdf>*.

Myers J, Jorgensen J, Sorel M*, et al.* (2018) Upper Willamette River
life cycle modeling and the potential effects of climate change. Report
to the USACE. 60 p. .

Myers JM, and 10 others (1998) Status review of chinook salmon from
Washington, Idaho, Oregon and California. *NOAA Technical Memorandum*
**NMFS-NWFSC-35**.

Myers JM, Hard JJ, Connor EJ*, et al.* (2015) Identifying historical
populations of steelhead within the Puget Sound Distinct Population
Segment. U.S. Dept. of Commerce, NOAA Tech. Memo., NMFS-NWFSC-128, 155
p.

NMFS (2007) Recovery Plan for the Hood Canal and Eastern Strait of Juan
de Fuca Summer Chum Salmon (Oncorhynchus keta) National Marine Fisheries
Service, Northwest Region. Portland, OR.

NMFS (2008) Endangered Species Act Section 7(a)(2) Consultation
Biological Opinion & Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation & Management
Act Essential Fish Habitat Consultation. Consultation on the
\"Willamette River Basin Flood Control Project\". July 11, 2008. NMFS
Consultation No.: NWR-2000-02117. 1205p. .

NMFS (2009) Recovery plan for Lake Ozette sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus
nerka). Prepared by NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service, Northwest
Regional Office, Salmon Recovery Division. Portland, OR. 394 pp.

NMFS (2014a) Endangered Species Act Section 7(a)(2) Biological Opinion,
Conference Opinion and Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and
Management Act Essential Fish Habitat Consultation, Mud Mountain Dam,
Operations and Maintenance. NMFS, West Coast Region. October 3, 2014. .

NMFS (2014b) *Salmon & Steelhead survival through the FCRPS: Graphs &
Data. URL:
<http://www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov/fish_passage/fcrps_opinion/salmon_and_steelhead_survival_through_the_fcrps.html>.*
<http://www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov/fish_passage/fcrps_opinion/salmon_and_steelhead_survival_through_the_fcrps.html>

NMFS (2015) ESA Recovery Plan for Snake River Sockeye Salmon
(*Oncorhynchus nerka*). June 8, 2015. Available:
[www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov](file:///C:\Users\mike.ford\Documents\MikeFord\Recovery%20planning\5%20year%20status%20reviews\2020%20five%20year%20status%20update\www.westcoast.fisheries.noaa.gov).

NMFS (2017a) Endangered Species Act (ESA) 7(a)(2) Biological Opinion and
Magnusion-Stevens fishery Conservation and Management Act Essential Fish
Habitat (EFH) Consultation. NOAA\'s Ntional Marine Fisheries Service\'s
implementation of the Mitchell Act final Environmnetal Impact Statement
preferred alternative and administration of Mitchell Act hatchery
funding. 535p.

NMFS (2017b) ESA Recovery plan for Snake River Fall Chinook salmon
(*Oncorhynchus tshawytscha*). November 2017. Available from
<https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/resource/document/recovery-plan-snake-river-fall-chinook-salmon>.

NMFS (2018) Notice of final determination and discussion of underlying
biological and environmental analyses; notice of availability of Finding
of No Significant Impact. FR 83:134 FR 32283-32284.

NMFS (2019a) Endangered Species Act Section 7(a)(2) Biological Opinion,
Conference Opinion and Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and
Management Act Essential Fish Habitat Consultation, Howard Hanson Dam,
Operations and Maintenance Green River (HUC17110013) King County,
Washington. NMFS, West Coast Region. February 15, 2019. .

NMFS (2019b) ESA Recovery Plan for the Puget Sound Steelhead Distinct
Population Segment (Oncorhynchus mykiss). National Marine Fisheries
Service. Seattle, WA. 174p.

NMFS (2019c) Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS) to Analyze
Impacts of NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service Proposed Approval of
Hatchery and Genetic Management Plans for spring Chinook salmon,
steelhead, and rainbow trout in the Upper Willamette River Basin
Pursuant to Section 7 and 4(d) of the Endangered Species Act. National
Marine Fisheries Service, Seattle, WA. 418 p.

Normandeau Associates Inc. (NAI) (2019) Spring Chinook salmon spawning
surveys in the Upper Willamette River Basin in 2018. Final Report. 51 p.

Normandeau Associates Inc. (NAI) (2020) Spring Chinook salmon spawning
surveys in the Upper Willamette River Basin in 2019. Final Report. 47 p.

Notch JJ, McHuron AS, Michel CJ*, et al.* (2020) Outmigration survival
of wild Chinook salmon smolts through the Sacramento River during
historic drought and high water conditions. *Environmental Biology of
Fishes* **103**, 561-576.

NWFSC (2015) Status review update for Pacific salmon and steelhead
listed under the Endangered Species Act: Pacific Northwest. Accessed 3
December 2019,
<https://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/assets/11/8623_03072016_124156_Ford-NWSalmonBioStatusReviewUpdate-Dec%2021-2015%20v2.pdf>.

O\'Malley K, Bohn S (2017) Genetic parentage analysis of Fall Creek
spring Chinook salmon: an evaluation of return timing and functional
gene diversity. Oregon State University. 35p.

ODFW (2007) Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. Oregon Coast Coho
Conservation Plan for the State of Oregon. Dated March 16, 2007. ODFW,
Salem, OR. Available online at
<http://www.dfw.state.or.us/fish/crp/docs/coastal_coho/final/Coho_Plan.pdf>.

ODFW, WDFW (2020a) 2020 Joint staff report: stock status and fisheries
for spring Chinook, summer Chinook, sockeye, steelhead, and other
species. Joint Columbia River Management Staff. 7 February 2020. 104 p.
<https://wdfw.wa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-02/2020_or_wa_spring_joint_staff_report.pdf>.

ODFW, WDFW (2020b) Joint staff report: Stock status and fisheries for
fall chinook salmon, coho salmon, chum salmon, summer steelhead, and
white sturgeon. Joint Columbia River Management Staff Report. 76 p.
<https://www.dfw.state.or.us/fish/OSCRP/CRM/reports/20_reports/2020_fall_jsr.pdf>.

Ohlberger J, Buehrens TW, Brenkman SJ*, et al.* (2018) Effects of past
and projected river discharge variability on freshwater production in an
anadromous fish. *Freshwater Biology* **63**, 331-340.

Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (2021) Oregon Coast Coho
Conservation Plan:12-Year Plan Assessment, draft dated 4-2-2021.
Available from ODFW, Salem, Oregon.

Pacific Salmon Commission (2020) Treaty between the government of Canada
and the Government of the United States of America concerning Pacific
Salmon. Vancouver, B.C.

PacifiCorp aPUDNoCC (2020) Lewis River fish passage program 2019 annual
report (Final). Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan metrics. 287 p.

Pakhomov E, Deeg C, Esenkulova S*, et al.* (2019) Summary of preliminary
findings of the International Gulf of Alaska expedition onboard the R/V
Professor Kaganovskiy during February 16--March 18, 2019. NPAFC Doc.
1858 \[online\]. Canada, Japan, Korea, Russia, and USA.

Parkhurst Z (1950) Survey of the Columbia River and its tributaries.
Part VII. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Special Scientific Report,
Fisheries No. 57. 19 p. .

Pearcy WG (1992) *Ocean ecology of North Pacific salmonids* University
of Washington Press, Seattle.

Pearcy WG, McKinnell SM (2007) The ocean ecology of salmon in the
northeast Pacific Ocean - An abridged history. In: *Ecology of Juvenile
Salmon in the Northeast Pacific Ocean: Regional Comparisons* (eds.
Grimes CB, Brodeur RD, Haldorson LJ, McKinnell SM), pp. 7-30.

Pearson S, Jeffries S, Lance M, Thomas A (2015) Identifying potential
juvenile steelhead predators in the marine waters of the Salish Sea.
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Wildlife Science Division,
Olympia. .

Pess G, McHenry M, Denton K, Anderson J, Liermann M (2020) Initial
response of Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshwytscha) and steelhead
(Oncorhynchus mykiss) to removal of two dams on the Elwha River,
Washington State, U.S.A. Draft 75p. .

Peterson WT, Fisher JL, Morgan CA*, et al.* (2019) Ocean ecosystem
indicators of salmon marine survival in the Northern California current.
97pp. Available at:
<https://www.cbfish.org/Document.mvc/Viewer/P178560>.

Peterson WT, Fisher JL, Peterson JO*, et al.* (2014a) Applied Fisheries
Oceanography Ecosystem Indicators of Ocean Condition Inform Fisheries
Management in the California Current. *Oceanography* **27**, 80-89.

Peterson WT, Fisher JL, Strub PT*, et al.* (2017) The pelagic ecosystem
in the Northern California Current off Oregon during the 2014--2016 warm
anomalies within the context of the past 20 years. *Journal of
Geophysical Research: Oceans* **122**, 7267-7290.

Peterson WT, Morgan CA, Peterson JO*, et al.* (2014b) Ocean Ecosystem
Indicators of Salmon Marine Survival in the Northern California Current.
Unpublished report. Available online at
<http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/research/divisions/fe/estuarine/oeip/documents/Peterson_etal_2014.pdf>.

PFMC (2019) Review of 2018 Ocean Salmon Fisheries: Stock Assessment and
Fishery Evaluation Document for the Pacific Coast Salmon Fishery
Management Plan. (Document prepared for the Council and its advisory
entities.) Pacific Fishery Management Council, 7700 NE Ambassador Place,
Suite 101, Portland, Oregon 97220-1384. 348 p.

PNPTT, WDFW (2014) Five-year review of the Summer Chum salmon
Conservation Initiative for the period 2005 through 2013: Supplemental
Report No. 8, Summer Chum Salmon Conservation Initiative \-- An
implementation plan to recover summer chum salmon in the Hood Canal and
Strait of Juan de Fuca region. September 2014. Wash. Dept. Fish and
Wildlife. Olympia, WA. 237 pp., including appendices. .

Point No Point Treaty Council (2020) Letter from Randy Harder to Robert
Markle, dated July 17, 2020, RE: NMFS 5 Year Review of ESA listed
species of Pacific salmon and steelhead. Poulsbo, WA. 6 pg.

Pollock M, Heim M, Werner D (2003) Hydrologic and geomorphic effects of
beaver dams and their influence on fishes. In: *The ecology and
management of wood in world rivers* (eds. Gregory S, Boyer K, Gurnell
A), pp. 213--233. American Fisheries Society, Bethesda, MD.

Pollock M, Lewallen G, Woodruff K, Jordan C, Castro J (2015) The beaver
restoration guidebook: Working with beaver to restore streams, wetlands,
and floodplains. Version 1.0. United States Fish and Wildlife Service,
Portland, Oregon. 189 pp.

Poxon BD, Faber DM, Ruzycki JR, Carmichael RW (2014) Abundance,
productivity and life history of Fifteen Mile Creek Steelhead. ODFW
Rept. to Bonneville Power Administration, Portland Oregon. BPA proj.
#2010-035-00. 64p.

PSTRT (2002) Puget Sound Technical Recovery Team. Planning ranges and
preliminary guidelines for the delisting and recovery of the Puget Sound
Chinook salmon evolutionarily significant unit. Available online at
<http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/trt/puget_docs/trtpopesu.pdf> \[accessed 11
July 2011\].

Puget Sound Partnership (2021) Factors Limiting progress in salmon
recovery. Salmon Science Advisory Group.

QCI (2013) Integrated Status and Effectiveness Monitoring Project:
Salmon Subbasin Cumulative Analysis Report: Sub-Report 3 -- Estimating
adult salmonid escapement using IPTDS. Quantitative Consultants, Inc. .
Report to BPA. Project #2003-017-00. pp 67-167.

Rawding D, Glaser B, Buehrens T (2014) Lower Columbia River fisheries
and escapement evaluation in Southwest Washington, 2010. Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife. FPT 14-10. 289 p.

Rawding D, Rodgers J (2013) Evaluation of the alignment of Lower
Columbia River salmn and steelhead monitoring program with management
decisions, questions, and objectives. Pacific Northwest Aquatic
Monitoring Partnership. 2012-001. 133 p.

Rawson K, Sands N, Currens K*, et al.* (2008) Viability Criteria for the
Lake Ozette Sockeye Salmon ESU. Puget Sound Technical Recovery Team
document. Northwest Fisheries Science Center. NOAA Fisheries Service.
Seattle, WA. 39 pp.

Richins SM, Skalski JR (2018) Steelhead overshoot and fallback rates in
the Columbia--Snake River basin and the influence of hatchery and
hydrosystem operations. *North American Journal of Fisheries Management*
**38**, 1122-1137.

Ritchie A, Bourgeois J (2009) Late Quaternary Sediment Source and
Deposition History of Lake Ozette. Report to: National Park Service
U.S., Department of the Interior, Olympic National Park, Port Angeles,
Washington.

Rubenson E, Townsend R, Havey M*, et al.* (2019) Cowlitz Falls North
Shore Collector downstream fish evaluation 2019 draft summary progres
report. For Peaks Environmental and Anchor QEA, LLC. 43 p.

Ruckelshaus MH, Currens KP, Graeber WH*, et al.* (2006) Independent
populations of Chinook salmon in Puget Sound. U.S. Dept. Commer., NOAA
Tech. Memo. NMFS-NWFSC-78, 125 p.

Salomone P, Elison T, Sands T, Head J, Lemons T (2019) 2018 Bristol Bay
Area Annual Managment Report. Alaska Dept. Fish and Game Fishery
Management Report 19-12.

Sands NJ, Rawson K, Currens K*, et al.* (2009) Determination of
independent populations and viability criteria for the Hood Canal summer
chum salmon evolutionarily significant unit. U.S. Dept. of Commerce,
NOAA Tech. Memo., NMFS-NWFSC-101, 58 p.

Satterthwaite WH, Beakes MP, Collins EM*, et al.* (2010) State-dependent
life history models in a changing (and regulated) environment: steelhead
in the California Central Valley. *Evolutionary Applications* **3**,
221-243.

Savage K (2017) Alaska and British Columbia large whale unusual
mortality event summary report.

Schroeder RK, Whitman LD, Cannon B, Olmsted P (2016) Juvenile
life-history diversity and population stability of spring Chinook salmon
in the Willamette River basin, Oregon. *Canadian Journal of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences* **73**, 921-934.

Seamons TR, Young SF, Bowman C, Warheit K, Murdoch A (2012) Examining
the genetic structure of Wenatchee basin steelhead and evaluating the
effects of the supplementation program. WDFW report to Chelan County PUD
and the Rock Island Habitat Conservation Plan Hatchery Committee. 49 p.

Serl J, Morrill C (2010) Summary report for the 1996 to 2009 seasonal
operation of the Cowlitz Falls Fish Facility and related Cowlitz Falls
anadromous reintroduction program activities. U.S. Dept. of Energy,
Bonneville Power Admistration. 195 p.

Serl JD, Bouchard L, Heimbigner D (2014) Data summary for the 2014
operation of the Cowlitz Falls Fish Facility and related activities.
U.S. Dept. of Energy. 42 p.

Sharpe C, Mapes B (2017) Upper Willamette River steelhead monitoring in
2016. Presentation to the Willamette Science River 9 February 2017.

Sharpe C, Mapes R, Cannon B*, et al.* (2017) Abundance, distribution,
diversity and survival of adult Chinook salmon in the Upper Willamette
River: 2015 and 2016. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. Prepared
for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Portland District Task Orders:
W9127N-12-2-0004-4009 and W9127N-10-2-0008-0036. 141 p. .

Simpson P (2020) Hood River Production Program Monitoring and Evaluation
Annual Progress Report for Calendar Year 2019. Oregon Department of Fish
and Wildlife (Project Number 1988‐053‐04) to Bonneville Power
Administration, Portland, Oregon. .

Steingass S, Wright B, Owen C*, et al.* (2019) Pinniped monitoring at
Willamette Falls, 2018-2019. Annual Report. Oregon Department of Fish
wand Wildlife. 34 p.

Stierhoff KL, Zwolinski JP, Demer DA (2020) Distribution, Biomass, and
Demography of Coastal Pelagic Fishes in the California Current Ecosystem
During Summer 2019 Based on Acoustic-Trawl Sampling.

Stout HA, Lawson P, Bottom D*, et al.* (2012) Scientific conclusions of
the status review for Oregon coast coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch).
U.S. Dept. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-NWFSC-118, 242 p.

Suring E (2017) Technical revision to the marine survival forecast of
the OCN Coho Work Group harvest matrix. Oregon Department of Fish and
Wildlife, Salem, Oregon.

Suring E, Burns P, Constable R, Lorion C, Wiley D (2015) Salmonid Life
Cycle Monitoring in Western Oregon streams, 2012-2014. Monitoring
Program Report Number OPSW-ODFW-2015-2, Oregon Department of Fish and
Wildlife, Salem.

Suring E, Constable RJ, Lorion CM, Miller BA, Wiley DJ (2012) Salmonid
life-cycle monitoring in Western Oregon streams, 2009-2011. Oregon
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Oregon Plan for Salmon and Watersheds,
Monitoring Rep. OPSW-ODFW-2011-2. Available online at
<https://nrimp.dfw.state.or.us/crl/reports/Annpro/LCMRpt0911.pdf>.

Susewind K (2020) Letter regarding Mid-Hood Canal Chinook salmon ESA
status to Mr Robert Markle, NOAA Fisheries, Portland, OR from Kelly
Susewind, Director, WDFW, Olympia, WA, dated May 26, 2020. .

TAC (U.S. v Oregon Technical Advisory Committee) (2020) Technical
Advisory Committee Annual Report: Abundance, Stock Status, Harvest, and
Endangered Species Act Impacts. Summary of 2019 Fisheries and Fish Runs.
May 14-51, 2020.

Takata TT (2011) Oregon Lower Columbia River fall and winter Chinook
spawning ground surveys 1952-2010. Oregon Department of Fish and
Wildlife. Columbia River Managment. 22 p.

Thompson AR (2019) STATE OF THE CALIFORNIA CURRENT 2018--19: A NOVEL
ANCHOVY REGIME AND A NEW MARINE HEATWAVE? *California cooperative
oceanic fisheries investigations* **60**.

Tidwell KS, Van der Leeuw BK, Magill LN*, et al.* (2019) *Evaluation of
Pinniped Predation on Adult Salmonids and Other Fish in the Bonneville
Dam Tailrace: 2017* US Army Corps of Engineers, Bonneville Lock and Dam.

Tiffan K, Perry R (2020) Research, Monitoring, and Evaluation of
Emerging Issues and Measures to Recover the Snake River Fall Chinook
Salmon ESU. U.S. Geological Survey, Western Fisheries Research Center,
Cook, WA. <https://www.cbfish.org/Document.mvc/Viewer/P176701>.

USGCRP (2018) Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States:
Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II D. R. Reidmiller, C. W.
Avery, D. R. Easterling, K. E. Kunkel, K. L. M. Lewis, T. K. Maycock,
and B. C. Stewart, editors. USGCRP, 2018: Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation
in the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II
\[Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M.
Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart (eds.)\]. U.S. Global Change
Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, 1515 pp. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.
U.S. Global Change Research Program,Washington, DC, USA, 1515 pp. doi:
10.7930/NCA4.2018., Washington, DC, USA.

Van Doornik DM, Hess MA, Johnson MA*, et al.* (2015) Genetic Population
Structure of Willamette River Steelhead and the Influence of Introduced
Stocks. *Transactions of the American Fisheries Society* **144**,
150-162.

Wagner HH, R.L. Wallace, and H.J. Campbell. (1963.) The seward migration
and return of hatchery-reared steelhead trout,. *Salmo gairdneri
Richardson, in the Alsea River, Oregon.*

Wainwright TC, Chilcote MW, Lawson PW*, et al.* (2008) Biological
recovery criteria for the Oregon Coast coho salmon evolutionarily
significant unit. U.S. Dept. of Commerce, NOAA Tech. Memo.,
NMFS-NWFSC-91, 199 p.

Wainwright TC, Lawson PW, Reeves GH*, et al.* (2014) Measuring
Biological Sustainability via a Decision Support System: Experiences
with Oregon Coast Coho Salmon. In: *Decision Support for Environmental
Management* (eds. Reynolds KM, Hessburg PF, Bourgeron PS), pp. 277-298.
Springer.

Wainwright TC, Weitkamp LA (2013) Effects of Climate Change on Oregon
Coast Coho Salmon: Habitat and Life-Cycle Interactions. *Northwest
Science* **87**, 219-242.

Wallis J (1963) *An evaluation of the North Santiam River Salmon
Hatcheries* Oregon Fish Commission Research Laboratory.

Warheit K (2014) Measuring reproductive interaction between
hatchery-origin and wild steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) from northern
Puget Sound populations potentially affected by segregated hatchery
programs. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Final Report. 92
p.

Warner MD, Mass CF, Salathe EP (2015) Changes in Winter Atmospheric
Rivers along the North American West Coast in CMIP5 Climate Models.
*Journal of Hydrometeorology* **16**, 118-128.

Waterhouse L, White J, See K, Murdoch A, Semmens BX (2020) A Bayesian
nested patch occupancy model to estimate steelhead movement and
abundance. *Ecological Applications*, e02202.

WDF, WDW, WWTIT (1993) 1992 Washington State Salmon and Steelhead Stock
Inventory. Washington Department of Fisheries, Washington Department of
Wildlife, Western Washington Treaty Indian Tribes, Olympia, WA.

WDFW, PSIT (2016) Puget Sound Steelhead Harvest Management Annual Report
Covering the 2014-2015 Fishing Season. March 2016. Olympia, Washington.
11p. .

WDFW, PSIT (2017) Puget Sound Steelhead Harvest Management Annual Report
Covering the 2015-2016 Fishing Season. March 2017. Olympia, Washington.
10p. .

WDFW, PSIT (2018) Puget Sound Steelhead Harvest Management Annual Report
Covering the 2016-2017 Fishing Season. February 2018. Olympia,
Washington. 10p. .

WDFW, PSIT (2019) Puget Sound Steelhead Harvest Management Annual Report
Covering the 2017-2018 Fishing Season. January 2019. Olympia,
Washington. 13p. .

WDFW, PSTIT (2015) Puget Sound Chinook Comprehensive Harvest Management
Plan. Annual Report, The 2014-2015 Fishing Season. December, 2016
revision. Olympia, Washington. 73 p + appendices.

WDFW, PSTIT (2016) Puget Sound Chinook Comprehensive Harvest Management
Plan. Annual Report, The 2015-2016 Fishing Season. November, 2016.
Olympia, Washington. 121 p.

WDFW, PSTIT (2017) Puget Sound Chinook Comprehensive Harvest Management
Plan. Annual Report, The 2016-2017 Fishing Season. September, 2017.
Olympia, Washington. 90 p + appendices.

WDFW, PSTIT (2018) Puget Sound Chinook Comprehensive Harvest Management
Plan. Annual Report, The 2017-2018 Fishing Season. November, 2018.
Olympia, Washington. 198 p.

WDFW, PSTIT (2019) Puget Sound Chinook Comprehensive Harvest Management
Plan. Annual Report, The 2018-2019 Fishing Season. October, 2019.
Olympia, Washington. 78 p.

WDFW, PSTIT (2020) Puget Sound Chinook Comprehensive Harvest Management
Plan. Annual Report, The 2019-2020 Fishing Season. October, 2020.
Olympia, Washington. 78 p.

WDFW Oa (2019) Joint staff report: Stock status and fisheries for fall
chinook salmon, coho salmon, chum salmon, summer steelhead, and white
sturgeon. Joint Columbia River Management Staff Report. 75 p.
<https://wdfw.wa.gov/publications/02085>.

Weigel D, Koch I, Monzyk F*, et al.* (2019) Effectiveness of a trap and
transport program to boost a threatened population of steelhead
(Oncorhynchus mykiss). Draft 18 p.

Weitkamp LA, Teel DJ, Liermann M*, et al.* (2015) Stock-specific size
and timing at ocean entry of Columbia River juvenile Chinook salmon and
steelhead: implications for early ocean growth. *Marine and Coastal
Fisheries* **7**, 515-534.

Weitkamp LA, Wainwright TC, Bryant GJ*, et al.* (1995) Status Review of
Coho Salmon from Washington, Oregon and California. In: *NOAA Technical
Memorandum*.

Whitman L, Cannon B, Hart S (2017) Spring Chinook salmon in the
Willamtte and Sandy Rivers. Annual Progress Report. Project
F-163-R-21/22. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. 30p.

Widener DL, Faulkner J, Smith S, Marsh T, RW Z (2018) Survival estimates
for the passage of spring‐migrating juvenile salmonids through Snake and
Columbia River dams and reservoirs, 2017. National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Seattle.
<https://www.webapps.nwfsc.noaa.gov/assets/26/9359_02262018_135356_Widener.et.al.2018-Spring-Survival-2017.pdf>.

Wilson J, Buehrens T, Olk E, Quenette J (2019) Evaluation of adult fish
weirs used to control the proportion of hatchery-origin fall Chinook
salmon in six Washington Lower Columbia River tributaries, 2013-2017.
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Ridgefield, Washington. 118
p.

Winans GA, Allen MB, Baker J*, et al.* (2018) Dam trout: Genetic
variability in Oncorhynchus mykiss above and below barriers in three
Columbia River systems prior to restoring migrational access. *Plos One*
**13**.

Winans GA, Baker J, McHenry M, Ward L, Myers J (2017) Genetic
characterization of Oncorhynchus mykiss prior to dam removal with
implications for recolonization of the Elwha River Watershed,
Washington. *Transactions of the American Fisheries Society* **146**,
160-172.

Wright B, Murtagh T, Brown R (2014) Willamette Falls Pinniped Monitoring
Project 2014. *Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife* **7118**.

Young W, Rosenberger A, Oakerman A*, et al.* (2020) Snake River Fall
Chinook Salmon Lower Granite Dam Run Reconstruction Report; Return Year
2019. Nez Perce Tribe, Department of Fisheries Resources Management.
<http://www.nptfisheries.org/PublicationLibrary.aspx>.

Young W, Rosenberger S, Milks DJ, Sandford B, Ellis S (2012) Snake River
Fall Chinook Salmon run reconstruction at Lower Granite dam. March 2012.

Zabel R (2019) Preliminary survival estimates for the passage of
spring-migrating juvenile salmonids through Snake and Columbia River
dams and Reservoirs, 2019. Memorandum for NOAAF WCR.

Zabel RW, Jordan CE (2020) Life Cycle Models of Interior Columbia River
Basin Spring/Summer-Run Chinook Salmon Populations.

Zador S, Ortiz I (2018) Ecosystem Status Report 2018: Aleutian Islands.
Report to the North Pacific Fishery Management Council, November 2018. .

Zador S, Yasumiishi E, Whitehouse G (2019) Ecosystem Status Report 2019:
Gulf of Alaska. Report to the North Pacific Fishery Management Council,
November 2019.

Zendt J (2020) White Salmon Subbasin Steelhead Spawning Survey Summary,
2012-2019. Report to the While Salmon Technical Workgroup.

Zimmerman CE, Reeves GH (2000) Population structure of sympatric
anadromous and nonanadromous *Oncorhynchus mykiss*: evidence from
spawning surveys and otolith microchemistry. *Canadian Journal of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences* **57**, 2152-2162.

# Supplement -- climate vulnerability analysis

Crozier *et al.* (2019) recently analyzed the vulnerability of all
Pacific salmon and steelhead ESU and DPS to climate change. Links to
this open access paper and its supplement providing summaries for each
ESU/DPS are provided here.

Main paper:
<https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0217711>

ESU/DPS summaries: <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0217711.s003>

[^1]: Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission, under contract to the
    NWFSC.

[^2]: For Pacific salmon, NMFS uses its 1991 ESU policy, that states
    that a population or group of populations will be considered a
    Distinct Population Segment if it is an Evolutionarily Significant
    Unit. The species *O. mykiss* is under the joint jurisdiction of the
    NMFS and the Fish and Wildlife Service, so in making its listing
    determinations NMFS used the 1996 Joint FWS-NMFS DPS policy for this
    species.

[^3]: Columbia River, Oregon Coast, and Puget Sound Steelhead, Coho,
    Chum, Sockeye, and Chinook Natural Origin Spawner Abundance Dataset
    (1949-2019). Spawner abundance data. Nez Perce Tribe, Idaho
    Department of Fish and Game, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife,
    Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, and Confederated Tribes
    of the Colville Reservation. Protocol and Methods available at
    https://fortress.wa.gov/dfw/score/score/;
    http://odfwrecoverytracker.org/metadata/;
    https://www.monitoringresources.org/Document/Protocol/Details/2246;
    https://www.monitoringmethods.org/Protocol/Details/159;
    https://www.cbfish.org/Document.mvc/Viewer/P148516;
    https://www.monitoringmethods.org/Protocol/Details/235. Accessed
    from www.cax.streamnet.org vers May 26 2020 10:00PM by Mari
    Williams, NOAAF NWFSC/OAI.

[^4]: Adult trap and haul program at Merwin Dam currently tranports a
    mix of hatchery and NOR winter steelhead. NOR abundance time series
    is currently not available.

[^5]: In 1998, the Clackamas River also contained a naturally-spawning
    spring-run Chinook salmon population, but ODFW did not recommend the
    inclusion of the Clackamas River in the ESU at that time.

[^6]: Of the five DIPs in the Skagit River, the abundance estimate only
    includes the Skagit, and Sauk River DIPs and Nookachamps Creek DIP,
    estimates are not available for the Baker River DIP (near zero) and
    the Cascade River DIP.
